Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page

Thank you for buying this
St. Martin’s Press ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in any
way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy
of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright,
please notify the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.

For Andy Scott, the miraculous mixer of romance and stability in my life. For our children, Battle
and Margaret, who give us daily surges of crazy joy and sane inspiration. For our parents, who taught
us everything. And for our siblings, who helped us find each other.

INTRODUCTION

LIKE MOST OF US, I once had a terrible boss—a person who thought that

humiliating people was a good way to motivate them. At one point, a
colleague mistakenly copied me on an email chain in which my boss had
ridiculed me repeatedly to my peers. When I confronted my boss, he told
me not to worry my “pretty little head” about it. Really.
Partially as a result of this experience, I started my own company—
Juice Software. My goal was to create an environment where people would
love their work and one another. Friends often laughed when I said that, as
if I were talking about a commune instead of a company. But I was serious.
I spent a lot more than eight hours a day at my job. If I didn’t enjoy my
work and my colleagues, the majority of my brief time on this planet would
be unhappy.
Unfortunately, while I did succeed in avoiding the mistakes my boss had
made—that was easy—I made a very different set of mistakes. In an effort
to create a positive, stress-free environment, I sidestepped the difficult but
necessary part of being a boss: telling people clearly and directly when their
work wasn’t good enough. I failed to create a climate in which people who
weren’t getting the job done were told so in time to fix it.
When I look back on that time, my mind immediately goes to a person
I’ll call “Bob.” Bob was one of those instantly likeable people who make
going to work a pleasure. He was a kind, funny, caring, and supportive
colleague. What’s more, he came to me with a stellar résumé and great

references. He seemed to be an A-plus hire, and I was thrilled to have him.
There was just one problem: his work was terrible. He lost my confidence
shortly after we hired him. He’d been working for weeks on a document to
explain that Juice allowed people to create Excel spreadsheets that updated
automatically. When I reviewed the document he’d been working on so
diligently, I was shocked to discover that it was totally incoherent—a kind
of word salad. And thinking back to when he handed it over to me, I
realized then that Bob also knew his work wasn’t good enough—the shame
in his eye and the apology in his smile when he handed it over to me were
unmistakable.
* * *
LET’S STOP RIGHT here for a second. If you’re a manager, you know already

that this was a hinge moment in the relationship between Bob and me, and a
significant bellwether of success or failure for my team. Bob’s work wasn’t
even close to good enough. We were a small company, struggling to get on
our feet, and we had zero bandwidth to redo his work, or to pick up his
slack. I knew this at the time. And yet, when I met with him, I couldn’t
bring myself to address the problem. I heard myself tell Bob that the work
was a good start and that I’d help him finish. He smiled uncertainly and left.
What happened? First, I liked Bob, and I didn’t want to come down too
hard on him. He had looked so nervous during the meeting when we
reviewed his document that I feared he might even cry. Because everyone
liked him so much, I also worried that if he did cry, everyone would think I
was an abusive bitch. Second, unless his résumé and references were bogus,
he’d done great work in the past. Maybe he’d been distracted by something
at home or was unused to our way of doing things. Whatever the reason, I
convinced myself that he’d surely return to the performance level that had
gotten him the job. Third, I could fix the document myself for now, and that
would be faster than teaching him how to re-write it.

Let’s first deal with how this affected Bob. Remember, he knew his
work wasn’t good, and so my false praise just messed with his mind. It
allowed him to deceive himself into thinking that he could continue along
the same course. Which he did. By failing to confront the problem, I’d
removed the incentive for him to try harder and lulled him into thinking
he’d be fine.
It’s brutally hard to tell people when they are screwing up. You don’t
want to hurt anyone’s feelings; that’s because you’re not a sadist. You don’t
want that person or the rest of the team to think you’re a jerk. Plus, you’ve
been told since you learned to talk, “If you don’t have anything nice to say,
don’t say anything at all.” Now all of a sudden it’s your job to say it.
You’ve got to undo a lifetime of training. Management is hard.
To make matters worse, I kept making the same mistake over and over
for ten months. As you probably know, for every piece of subpar work you
accept, for every missed deadline you let slip, you begin to feel resentment
and then anger. You no longer just think the work is bad: you think the
person is bad. This makes it harder to have an even-keeled conversation.
You start to avoid talking to the person at all.
And of course, the impact of my behavior with Bob didn’t stop with
him: others on the team wondered why I accepted such poor work.
Following my lead, they too tried to cover for him. They would fix mistakes
he’d made and do or redo his work, usually when they should have been
sleeping. Covering for people is sometimes necessary for a short period of
time—say, if somebody is going through a crisis. But when it goes on too
long it starts to take a toll. People whose work had been exceptional started
to get sloppy. We missed key deadlines. Knowing why Bob’s colleagues
were late, I didn’t give them too hard a time. Then they began to wonder if I
knew the difference between great and mediocre; perhaps I didn’t even take
the missed deadlines seriously. As is often the case when people are not
sure if the quality of what they are doing is appreciated, the results began to
suffer, and so did morale.

As I faced the prospect of losing my team, I realized I couldn’t put it off
any longer. I invited Bob to have coffee with me. He expected to have a
nice chat, but instead, after a few false starts, I fired him. Now we were
both huddled miserably over our muffins and lattes. After an excruciating
silence, Bob pushed his chair back, metal screeching on marble, and looked
me straight in the eye. “Why didn’t you tell me?”
As that question was rolling around in my mind with no good answer,
he asked me a second question: “Why didn’t anyone tell me? I thought you
all cared about me!”
It was the low point of my career. I had made a series of mistakes, and
Bob was taking the fall. Not only was my earlier praise a head-fake—I’d
never given Bob any criticism. I’d also never asked him to give me
feedback, which might have allowed him to talk things through and perhaps
find a solution. Worst of all, I’d failed to create a culture in which Bob’s
peers would naturally warn him when he was going off the rails. The team’s
cohesion was cracking, and it showed in our results. Lack of praise and
criticism had absolutely disastrous effects on the team and on our outcomes.
You can draw a straight line from lack of guidance to a dysfunctional
team that gets poor results. It wasn’t just too late for Bob. It was too late for
the whole company; Juice failed not too long after I fired Bob.

GOOGLE: FREE AT WORK
IT WAS 2004, and I needed a job, so I called a classmate from business school,

Sheryl Sandberg. She’d joined Google three years earlier, and I’d recently
sat next to her at a mutual friend’s wedding. What had struck me was that,
though Sheryl clearly cared about the people who worked on her team at
Google, I had a feeling she would not make the same mistake I’d made with
Bob. Later, I’d learn just how true that was.
After running a gauntlet of twenty-seven interviews, I got an offer to
work for Sheryl to lead a team of one hundred people responsible for sales
and service of small- and medium-sized groups of AdSense1 customers. I

didn’t even know what AdSense was. What I did know was that Google’s
culture struck me as the resurrection of my dream about creating an
environment where people loved their work and one another, and that
Sheryl struck me as a great boss. As a friend of mine later joked, “In Silicon
Valley, you don’t fall down; you fall up.” (Rest assured, Bob has also
landed on his feet.)
* * *
SHORTLY AFTER I joined Google, I witnessed an impressive

display of
productive but extremely direct feedback. I was at a meeting with Larry
Page, Google’s cofounder, and Matt Cutts, who led the team that fought
Webspam.2 We were discussing a proposal that Matt and I had. Larry had a
different, more subtle plan, which I didn’t understand. But it was clear that
Matt did understand Larry’s plan and didn’t like it one bit. Matt—generally
a very pleasant, easygoing guy—disagreed, heatedly. When Larry wouldn’t
back down, Matt started yelling at Larry. He said Larry’s idea would flood
him with “so much crap” he’d never keep up.
I felt unnerved by Matt’s reaction. I liked him, and I was afraid he’d get
fired for criticizing Larry’s position so vehemently. Then I saw the big grin
on Larry’s face. Not only did he permit Matt’s challenging him—he seemed
to relish it. I could see from the open, happy way he responded to the
argument that he wanted not just Matt but everyone at Google to feel
comfortable criticizing authority—especially his. It didn’t make any sense
to label this conversation “nice” or “mean,” “rude” or “polite.” It was
productive and collaborative. It was free. It was driving to the best answer.
How had Larry achieved that?
I decided to try to take a page out of Larry’s book. Rather than focus on
“giving feedback” to my team, I encouraged them to tell me when I was
wrong. I did everything I could to encourage people to criticize me, or at
least simply to talk to me. After a false start (more on that later) the team
started to open up. We began to debate openly, and we had more fun

together. I was lucky enough to hire some remarkable people, including
Russ Laraway, with whom I’ve cofounded a new company, Candor, Inc.,
and Jared Smith, cofounder of Qualtrics, whose board I sit on now. I
learned just as much from the people who worked for me as from the
people whom I worked for about how to be a good boss. We experimented
with not making any decisions in my staff meeting, instead pushing them
out to the people closest to the facts. We started executing more efficiently.
Wanting to make it safe to “speak truth to power” at all levels of the
organization, we experimented with “manager fix-it weeks” and carefully
designed “manager feedback sessions.”
I’ll explain all these techniques and more in the second half of this
book, but the important thing to know for now is that at Google managers
couldn’t just rely on “power” or “authority” to get things done. They had to
figure out a different, better way.
After six years at Google, I felt confident I’d done just that: I’d learned
a better way to be a boss. I didn’t repeat my mistake with Bob, but I didn’t
become an asshole either. The businesses I led had grown revenue by more
than ten times, to several billion dollars. A lot of that growth was productdriven, not sales-driven. But we certainly contributed. We were obsessive
about efficiency, and we managed to shrink headcount in North America
even as revenue grew dizzyingly—the definition of scaling. Over time, in
addition to AdSense, my team included the global YouTube and
DoubleClick online sales and operations teams. We started out with one
team in North America, and the team’s quirky, fun-loving culture was
strong enough to be a unifying force between Dublin, São Paulo, Buenos
Aires, New York, Mountain View, Sydney, Seoul, Tokyo, Beijing, and
Singapore.
Increasingly, though, I found myself caring less and less about the core
business metrics (cost per click, revenue, etc.). What really interested me
was figuring out how to define and teach others this “better way” to be a
boss that I’d developed. It was still more of an instinct than a philosophy,
though. I needed time to think, so I could articulate it.

APPLE: “WE HIRE PEOPLE WHO TELL US WHAT TO DO,
NOT THE OTHER WAY AROUND”
THERE WAS NO job at Google that would allow me to sit back and just think,

and an operating role doesn’t leave much time for quiet contemplation.
Fortunately, nine miles to the southwest, Steve Jobs had started Apple
University. My business school professor, Richard Tedlow, had just left
Harvard to join Job’s new factory of good leadership. He described Apple
U’s mandate like this: “We want to defy the gravitational pull of
organizational mediocrity.” An important part of achieving that goal was to
develop a class: Managing at Apple. When I was offered the job to design
and teach that class, I jumped at the chance.
Managing at Apple was for first-time managers, but executives found it
equally useful for the senior leaders on their teams. Though the class was
not required, our biggest problem was keeping up with demand. In the time
I worked at Apple, we taught thousands of people, to great reviews. Many
more have taken the class since I left.
I learned as much as I taught. A conversation I had with one of Apple’s
leaders helped me see a critical flaw in my approach to building teams
earlier in my career. I’d always focused on the people most likely to be
promoted. I assumed that was how it had to be at a growth company. Then a
leader at Apple pointed out to me that all teams need stability as well as
growth to function properly; nothing works well if everyone is gunning for
the next promotion. She called the people on her team who got exceptional
results but who were on a more gradual growth trajectory “rock stars”
because they were like the Rock of Gibraltar on her team. These people
loved their work and were world-class at it, but they didn’t want her job or
to be Steve Jobs. They were happy where they were. The people who were
on a steeper growth trajectory—the ones who’d go crazy if they were still
doing the same job in a year—she called “superstars.” They were the source
of growth on any team. She was explicit about needing a balance of both.

This was a revelation. Apple was growing fast, and bigger than Google.
And yet Apple made room for people with all sorts of different ambitions.
You had to be great at what you did and you had to love your work, but you
did not have to be promotion-obsessed to have a fulfilling career at Apple.
At Google, I’d systematically undervalued the so-called rock stars. This
mistake had caused a lot of unhappiness for people who contributed
significantly. Google’s bias for people on a steep growth trajectory was in
part a reaction against the norm at traditional companies, which tend to clip
the wings of people who want to “change everything.” Apple made room
for all different types of ambition, and that was part of how it got big while
defying “the gravitational pull of organizational mediocrity.”
* * *
GOOGLE IS FAMOUSLY viewed as a bottom-up company, one that empowers

even very young employees to drive decision-making. The managers’ role
is mostly to stay out of the way, sometimes to help, but never to interfere
too much. I expected the opposite at Apple, having bought in to the
narrative of the all-controlling Steve Jobs passing down his brilliant vision
from on high, brooking no dissent, and driving his team to make it happen.
But it wasn’t so.
A colleague shared an anecdote about interviewing with Steve that
illustrated why this was the case. My colleague asked Jobs several perfectly
reasonable questions: “How do you envision building the team? How big
will the team be?” Steve’s curt response: “Well, if I knew the answer to all
those questions, then I wouldn’t need you, would I?” Borderline rude, but
also empowering. Jobs articulated this approach more gently in an interview
with Terry Gross: “At Apple we hire people to tell us what to do, not the
other way around.” And indeed, this was my experience at the company.
At Apple, as at Google, a boss’s ability to achieve results had a lot more
to do with listening and seeking to understand than it did with telling people
what to do; more to do with debating than directing; more to do with

pushing people to decide than with being the decider; more to do with
persuading than with giving orders; more to do with learning than with
knowing.

YOUR RELATIONSHIPS ARE CORE TO YOUR JOB
THERE’S A WORLD of difference between autonomy and neglect, though … I

learned what it felt like to get that wrong in my experience with Bob. Here’s
what I learned about how to get that right.
In Managing at Apple, we often played a video of Steve explaining his
approach to giving criticism. He captured something very important: “You
need to do that in a way that does not call into question your confidence in
their abilities but leaves not too much room for interpretation … and that’s a
hard thing to do.” He went on to say, “I don’t mind being wrong. And I’ll
admit that I’m wrong a lot. It doesn’t really matter to me too much. What
matters to me is that we do the right thing.”3 Amen! Who could argue with
that?
But if you rewound that tape just a bit, you’d find the question that had
prompted Steve’s reply. Someone had asked him why he frequently used
the phrase “Your work is shit.” At face value, these words are, to say the
least, unlikely to build trust or make your team feel empowered to take
risks. It feels like bullying, and in some cases it might have been. I certainly
couldn’t recommend that anyone say that to people. Initially, I got around
this in a flip way. “Remember,” I said, “You are not Steve Jobs.”
This always got a chuckle, but it actually dodged an important issue. I
thought back to that argument between Matt Cutts and Larry Page. For
some reason, they could yell at each other and it was OK. Why? I certainly
would never say, “Your work is shit,” or yell at my colleagues.
Or would I? I recalled a time at Google when we were rolling out
AdSense internationally. Jared Smith, who’d worked with me at Juice and
was also on my team at Google kept confusing Slovakia and Slovenia and

acting as if the distinction didn’t matter. After the fifth time he’d confused
the two in a thirty-minute meeting, I snapped, “It’s Slovakia, dumbass!!”
Jared and I had worked together long enough that he (and everyone else
in the room) knew how deeply I respected him. He could, and occasionally
did, rebuke me in the same affectionately rude way. My sharp correction
was simply a short, effective way to get him to focus. He didn’t make the
mistake again. The only reason it was OK for me to talk to Jared that way
was because of the relationship we’d formed over the years.
My point is not that you need to cuss or shout or be rude to be a great
boss. In fact, I wouldn’t recommend it, because even if your relationship
evolves to the point where you think mutual respect is understood, as boss
you sometimes just misread signals. The point is, rather, that if you are
someone who is most comfortable communicating in that way, you have to
build relationships of trust that can support it, and you have to hire people
who can adapt to your style.
* * *
SILICON VALLEY WAS an ideal setting in which to explore the relationships

between bosses and the people who report directly to them. Twenty years
ago, management skills were neither taught nor rewarded in Silicon Valley,
but today its companies are obsessed with it. This isn’t for the reasons you
might think—that they are run by new-age gurus ever in search of a theory,
or because the people there are fundamentally different from people
anywhere else. Nor is it because the companies there have huge budgets for
training, or have some fundamental insight into human nature unleashed by
access to all that big data.
No, the reason why Silicon Valley turned out to be a good place to study
the relationships between bosses and the people who report to them is that
the war for “talent” there is intense. So many great companies in the Valley
are growing and hiring that there’s no reason to stay with a company if you
are unhappy or think your potential is being wasted. And there’s certainly

no reason to pay the “asshole tax.” If you don’t like your boss, you quit,
knowing that ten other companies will be lining up to hire you. So the
pressure on companies to get these relationships right is enormous.
Even in Silicon Valley, relationships don’t scale. Larry Page can’t have a
real relationship with more than a handful of people any more than you can.
But the relationships you have with the handful of people who report
directly to you will have an enormous impact on the results your team
achieves. If you lead a big organization, you can’t have a relationship with
everybody. But the relationships you have with your direct reports will
impact the relationships they have with their direct reports. The ripple effect
will go a long way toward creating—or destroying—a positive culture.
Relationships may not scale, but culture does.
Is “relationship” really the right word? Yes. The relationship between
Eric Schmidt, Google’s CEO from 2001–2011, and Larry Page was one of
business history’s more interesting dances. And the willingness of Tim
Cook, then COO and now CEO of Apple, to give part of his liver to Steve
Jobs, and Jobs’s refusal to accept the sacrifice, exemplifies a profoundly
personal relationship.
What is the proper nature of this relationship? Managerial capitalism is
a relatively new phenomenon, so this human bond was not described by
ancient philosophers. Even though almost everybody today has a boss at
some point, the nature of this connection has gotten short shrift in
philosophy, literature, movies, and all the other ways we explore the
relationships that govern our lives. I want to fix that, because at the very
heart of being a good boss—at Apple, at Google, or anywhere else on earth
—is a good relationship.
The term I found that best describes this relationship is Radical Candor.

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

I’VE WRITTEN THIS BOOK WITH the end user—you—in mind. What I have

learned not only from my own experiences but also from coaching leaders
is that, no matter how supportive the environment, bosses often feel alone.
They feel ashamed that they’re not doing a good job, sure that everyone
else is doing better, and thus unable or afraid to seek help. But of course no
boss is perfect. What drives my mission to share the concepts and methods
presented here is the desire to help you avoid making the mistakes I made.
That is why I tell so many personal stories.
Part I is designed to set your mind at ease. Being a good boss is hard for
everyone, no matter how successful they appear on the outside. You’ll find
some part of your own experience borne out in the real-life stories
described here. I hope you’ll also feel the optimism that comes from
knowing that 1) you are not alone and 2) a better approach may be less
difficult than you fear. Your humanity is an asset to your effectiveness, not a
liability.
Part II is the how-to handbook: a step-by-step approach for building
Radically Candid relationships with your direct reports, and how Radical
Candor can help you fulfill your key responsibility as a boss: to guide your
team to achieve results.
As you read on, you might occasionally feel overwhelmed by the
number of things I’m suggesting you do as a manager. Take a deep breath.
My goal is to save you time, not to litter your calendar with meetings. You

do need to spend time with your direct reports to be a great boss, but you
don’t need to spend ALL your time with them. If you implement every
single idea, tool, and technique in this book, the time you dedicate to
managing your team will come to approximately ten hours a week, and
those ten hours should save you enormous lost time and headaches later. I’ll
also suggest you block out about fifteen hours a week for you to think and
execute independently in your area of expertise. That leaves another fifteen
hours in a forty-hour work week. Hopefully you can claim them as your
own, though if you’re like me you’ll have to use most of them to deal with
the unpredictable.
While this book was written very much with you, the boss, in mind, I
also want to acknowledge your boss, as well as the Human Resources and
Learning and Development people who support you. When I led a team of
seven hundred people at Google, I saw that managers typically make the
same mistakes over and over again. Despite the predictability, successful
intervention proved dishearteningly elusive. Some days I felt like I was
watching a slow-motion train wreck I’d seen dozens of times before. It was
the worst sort of déjà vu. I’ve recognized the same feeling in the
expressions of the HR and L&D people who advised me as I wrote this
book. I hope it will help you prevent the endless repetition of predictable
mistakes.
Radical Candor is also directly relevant to people struggling with issues
of diversity and leadership. Gender, racial, and cultural differences do make
having Radically Candid relationships harder. It’s scary to be Radically
Candid with those who look like us. It’s scarier when people look different,
speak a different language, or practice a different religion. We are all more
likely to be “ruinously empathetic” or “obnoxiously aggressive” or
“manipulatively insincere” toward people who are different from us.
Learning how to push ourselves and others past this discomfort, to relate to
our shared humanity, can make a huge difference.

PART I

A NEW MANAGEMENT
PHILOSOPHY

1.
BUILD RADICALLY CANDID
RELATIONSHIPS
Bringing your whole self to work
IT’S CALLED MANAGEMENT, AND IT’S YOUR JOB
I USUALLY FELT a little surge of pleasure as I stepped off the elevator into the

cavernous former warehouse in the East Village we’d rented as the office of
Juice Software, the start-up I’d cofounded in 2000. That day, I just felt
stressed.
The engineers had worked nights and weekends on an early “beta”
version of our product, which would be ready in a week. The sales team had
gotten thirty big-name customers lined up for beta testing. If those
customers were using our product, we’d be able to raise another round of
funding. If not, we’d run out of money in six months.
There was one blocker: me. The night before, one of our angel
investors, Dave Roux, had told me he thought our pricing was all wrong.
“Think about the last time you bought a used car—one that cost less than
$10,000. Now, think about the guy who sold it to you. That’s who your
salespeople will be. That’s who’ll represent you in the market.” I knew in
my gut Dave was right, but I couldn’t go to my sales team or my board and

change everything just based on a gut feeling. I needed to sit down and do
some analysis—fast. I’d cleared my calendar of meetings for the morning
so I could do just that.
I’d gotten only a few steps into the office when a colleague suddenly ran
up. He needed to talk right away. He had just learned that he might need a
kidney transplant, and he was completely freaked out. After an hour and
two cups of tea, he seemed calmer.
I walked toward my desk, past an engineer whose child was in the ICU.
Must check in. “How’d your son do last night?” I asked. He hadn’t
improved—and as he told me how the night had gone we both had tears in
our eyes. I convinced him to leave the office and go and take care of
himself for an hour before returning to the hospital.
I left his desk drained, passing by our quality assurance manager. His
child had better news: she’d just received the highest score in the entire
state on a standardized math test. He wanted to talk about it. I felt emotional
whiplash as I jumped from sympathy to celebration.
By the time I got back to my desk, I had no time or emotional reserves
to think about pricing. I cared about each of these people, but I also felt
worn out—frustrated that I couldn’t get any “real” work done. Later that
day, I called my CEO coach, Leslie Koch, to complain.
“Is my job to build a great company,” I asked, “or am I really just some
sort of emotional babysitter?”
Leslie, a fiercely opinionated ex-Microsoft executive, could barely
contain herself. “This is not babysitting,” she said. “It’s called management,
and it is your job!”
Every time I feel I have something more “important” to do than listen to
people, I remember Leslie’s words: “It is your job!” I’ve used Leslie’s line
on dozens of new managers who’ve come to me after a few weeks in their
new role, moaning that they feel like “babysitters” or “shrinks.”
We undervalue the “emotional labor” of being the boss. That term is
usually reserved for people who work in the service or health industry:
psychiatrists, nurses, doctors, waiters, flight attendants. But as I will show

in the pages to come, this emotional labor is not just part of the job; it’s the
key to being a good boss.

HOW TO BE A GOOD BOSS
GIVEN MY LINE of work, I get asked by almost everyone I meet how to be a

better boss/manager/leader. I get questions from the people who worked for
me, the CEOs I coached, the people who attended a class I taught or a talk I
gave. I get questions from people who are using the management software
system that Russ Laraway and I cofounded a company, Candor, Inc., to
build. Others have submitted their management dilemmas to our Web site
(radicalcandor.com). But questions also come from the harried parent sitting
next to me at the school play who doesn’t know how to tell the babysitter
not to feed the kids so much sugar; the contractor who is frustrated when
his crew doesn’t show up on time; the nurse who’s just been promoted to
supervisor and is telling me how bewildering it is—as she takes my blood
pressure, I feel I should be taking hers; the business executive who’s
speaking with exaggerated patience into his cell phone as we board a plane,
snaps it shut, and asks nobody in particular, “Why did I hire that goddamn
moron?”; the friend still haunted by the expression on the face of an
employee whom she laid off years ago. Regardless of who asks the
questions, they tend to reveal an underlying anxiety: many people feel they
aren’t as good at management as they are at the “real” part of the job. Often,
they fear they are failing the people who report to them.
While I hate to see this kind of stress, I find these conversations
productive because I know I can help. By the end of these talks, people feel
much more confident that they can be a great boss.
There’s often a funny preamble to the questions I get, because most
people don’t like the words for their role: “boss” evokes injustice,
“manager” sounds bureaucratic, “leader” sounds self-aggrandizing. I prefer
the word “boss” because the distinctions between leadership and
management tend to define leaders as BSers who don’t actually do anything

and managers as petty executors. Also, there’s a problematic hierarchical
difference implied in the two words, as if leaders no longer have to manage
when they achieve a certain level of success, and brand-new managers don’t
have to lead. Richard Tedlow’s biography of Andy Grove, Intel’s legendary
CEO, asserts that management and leadership are like forehand and
backhand. You have to be good at both to win. I hope by the end of this
book you’ll have a more positive association with all three words: boss,
manager, leader.
Having dispensed with semantics, the next question is often very basic:
what do bosses/managers/leaders do? Go to meetings? Send emails? Tell
people what to do? Dream up strategies and expect other people to execute
them? It’s tempting to suspect them of doing a whole lot of nothing.
Ultimately, though, bosses are responsible for results. They achieve
these results not by doing all the work themselves but by guiding the people
on their teams. Bosses guide a team to achieve results.
The questions I get asked next are clustered around each of these three
areas of responsibility that managers do have: guidance, team-building, and
results.
First, guidance.
Guidance is often called “feedback.” People dread feedback—both the
praise, which can feel patronizing, and especially the criticism. What if the
person gets defensive? Starts to yell? Threatens to sue? Bursts into tears?
What if the person refuses to understand the criticism, or can’t figure out
what to do to fix the problem? What if there isn’t any simple way to fix the
problem? What should a boss say then? But it’s no better when the problem
is really simple and obvious. Why doesn’t the person already know it’s a
problem? Do I actually have to say it? Am I too nice? Am I too mean? All
these questions loom so large that people often forget they need to solicit
guidance from others, and encourage it between them.
Second, team-building.
Building a cohesive team means figuring out the right people for the
right roles: hiring, firing, promoting. But once you’ve got the right people

in the right jobs, how do you keep them motivated? Particularly in Silicon
Valley, the questions sound like this: why does everyone always want the
next job when they haven’t even mastered the job they have yet? Why do
millennials expect their career to come with instructions like a Lego set?
Why do people leave the team as soon as they get up to speed? Why do the
wheels keep coming off the bus? Why won’t everyone just do their job and
let me do mine?
Third, results.
Many managers are perpetually frustrated that it seems harder than it
should be to get things done. We just doubled the size of the team, but the
results are not twice as good. In fact, they are worse. What happened?
Sometimes things move too slowly: the people who work for me would
debate forever if I let them. Why can’t they make a decision? But other
times things move too fast: we missed our deadline because the team was
totally unwilling to do a little planning—they insisted on just firing willynilly, no ready, no aim! Why can’t they think before they act? Or they seem
to be on automatic pilot: they are doing exactly the same thing this quarter
that they did last quarter, and they failed last quarter. Why do they expect
the results to be different?
Guidance, team, and results: these are the responsibilities of any boss.
This is equally true for anyone who manages people—CEOs, middle
managers, and first-time leaders. CEOs may have broader problems to deal
with, but they still have to work with other human beings, with all the
quirks and skills and weaknesses just as apparent and relevant to their
success in the C Suite as when they got their very first management role.
It’s natural that managers who wonder whether they are doing right by
the people who report to them want to ask me about these three topics. I’ll
address each fully over the course of this book.

RELATIONSHIPS, NOT POWER, DRIVE YOU FORWARD

BUT THE MOST important question, the question that goes to the heart of

being a good boss, doesn’t usually get asked. An exception was Ryan
Smith, the CEO of Qualtrics. I’d just started coaching him, and his first
question to me was, “I have just hired several new leaders on my team.
How can I build a relationship with each of them quickly, so that I can trust
them and they can trust me?”
Very few people focus first on the central difficulty of management that
Ryan hit on: establishing a trusting relationship with each person who
reports directly to you. If you lead a big organization, you can’t have a
relationship with everyone; but you can really get to know the people who
report directly to you. Many things get in the way, though: power dynamics
first and foremost, but also fear of conflict, worry about the boundaries of
what’s appropriate or “professional,” fear of losing credibility, time
pressure.
Nevertheless, these relationships are core to your job. They determine
whether you can fulfill your three responsibilities as a manager: 1) to create
a culture of guidance (praise and criticism) that will keep everyone moving
in the right direction; 2) to understand what motivates each person on your
team well enough to avoid burnout or boredom and keep the team cohesive;
and 3) to drive results collaboratively. If you think that you can do these
things without strong relationships, you are kidding yourself. I’m not saying
that unchecked power, control, or authority can’t work. They work
especially well in a baboon troop or a totalitarian regime. But if you’re
reading this book, that’s not what you’re shooting for.
There is a virtuous cycle between your responsibilities and your
relationships. You strengthen your relationships by learning the best ways to
get, give, and encourage guidance; by putting the right people in the right
roles on your team; and by achieving results collectively that you couldn’t
dream of individually. Of course, there can be a vicious cycle between your
responsibilities and your relationships, too. When you fail to give people
the guidance they need to succeed in their work, or put people into roles

they don’t want or aren’t well-suited for, or push people to achieve results
they feel are unrealistic, you erode trust.

Your relationships and your responsibilities reinforce each other
positively or negatively, and this dynamic is what drives you forward as a
manager—or leaves you dead in the water. Your relationships with your
direct reports affect the relationships they have with their direct reports, and
your team’s culture. Your ability to build trusting, human connections with
the people who report directly to you will determine the quality of
everything that follows.
Defining those relationships is vital. They’re deeply personal, and
they’re not like any other relationships in your life. But most of us are at a
loss when we set about to build those relationships. Radical Candor, the
fundamental concept of this book, can help guide you.

RADICAL CANDOR
DEVELOPING TRUST IS not simply a matter of “do x, y, and z, and you have a

good relationship.” Like all human bonds, the connections between bosses
and the people who report to them are unpredictable and not subject to
absolute rules. But I have identified two dimensions that, when paired, will
help you move in a positive direction.

The first dimension is about being more than “just professional.” It’s
about giving a damn, sharing more than just your work self, and
encouraging everyone who reports to you to do the same. It’s not enough to
care only about people’s ability to perform a job. To have a good
relationship, you have to be your whole self and care about each of the
people who work for you as a human being. It’s not just business; it is
personal, and deeply personal. I call this dimension “Care Personally.”
The second dimension involves telling people when their work isn’t
good enough—and when it is; when they are not going to get that new role
they wanted, or when you’re going to hire a new boss “over” them; when
the results don’t justify further investment in what they’re working on.
Delivering hard feedback, making hard calls about who does what on a
team, and holding a high bar for results—isn’t that obviously the job of any
manager? But most people struggle with doing these things. Challenging
people generally pisses them off, and at first that doesn’t seem like a good
way to build a relationship or to show that you “care personally.” And yet
challenging people is often the best way to show them that you care when
you’re the boss. This dimension I call “Challenge Directly.”
“Radical Candor” is what happens when you put “Care Personally” and
“Challenge Directly” together. Radical Candor builds trust and opens the
door for the kind of communication that helps you achieve the results
you’re aiming for. And it directly addresses the fears that people express to
me when asking questions about the management dilemmas they face. It
turns out that when people trust you and believe you care about them, they
are much more likely to 1) accept and act on your praise and criticism; 2)
tell you what they really think about what you are doing well and, more
importantly, not doing so well; 3) engage in this same behavior with one
another, meaning less pushing the rock up the hill again and again; 4)
embrace their role on the team; and 5) focus on getting results.
Why “radical”? I chose this word because so many of us are conditioned
to avoid saying what we really think. This is partially adaptive social

behavior; it helps us avoid conflict or embarrassment. But in a boss, that
kind of avoidance is disastrous.
Why “candor”? The key to getting everyone used to being direct when
challenging each other (and you!) is emphasizing that it’s necessary to
communicate clearly enough so that there’s no room for interpretation, but
also humbly. I chose “candor” instead of “honesty” because there’s not
much humility in believing that you know the truth. Implicit with candor is
that you’re simply offering your view of what’s going on and that you
expect people to offer theirs. If it turns out that in fact you’re the one who
got it wrong, you want to know. At least I hope you want to know!
The most surprising thing about Radical Candor may be that its results
are often the opposite of what you fear. You fear people will become angry
or vindictive; instead they are usually grateful for the chance to talk it
through. And even when you do get that initial anger, resentment, or
sullenness, those emotions prove to be fleeting when the person knows you
really care. As the people who report to you become more Radically Candid
with each other, you spend less time mediating. When Radical Candor is
encouraged and supported by the boss, communication flows, resentments
that have festered come to the surface and get resolved, and people begin to
love not just their work but whom they work with and where they work.
When people love their job, the whole team is more successful. The
resulting happiness is the success beyond success.

CARE PERSONALLY: THE FIRST DIMENSION OF RADICAL
CANDOR
MY FIRST LESSON about why it’s important to care personally took place in

Moscow on July 4, 1992, while I was standing under a tarp in the rain with
ten of the world’s best diamond cutters, whom I was trying to hire. I was
working for a New York diamond company. I‘d graduated from college two
years earlier with a degree in Russian literature. My education had seemed
irrelevant to my current situation. My assignment just required common

sense, not a deep understanding of human nature. I had to convince these
people to leave the state-owned Russian factory that paid them in rubles,
which were almost worthless. I, on the other hand, could pay with U.S.
dollars—a lot of them. And that was how you motivated people, right? You
paid them.
Wrong. The diamond cutters wanted a picnic.
And so we stood under the tarp, eating shashlyk—grilled chunks of
meat—and small, tart apples, passing a bottle of vodka around while the
diamond cutters peppered me with questions. Their first assignment would
be to cut a 100-carat diamond into a pair of one-of-a-kind earrings. “Who
could buy such large jewels?” the diamond cutters wanted to know. I
explained they were a gift from a Saudi sheikh to his wife, who was having
twins. What did I know about using lasers to cut diamonds? I promised to
take them to Israel to see the latest technology, which was still less efficient
than the old copper disks they used. They wanted to learn English. I
promised to teach them myself. “Would it also be possible to have lunch
together every week or so?” Absolutely. As we drained the bottle of vodka,
another question came. “If everything went to hell in Russia, would you get
us and our families out of here?” I understood this was the only question
that really mattered. By the end of our picnic, I finally realized that the most
important thing I could do that the state could not do was to simply give a
damn, personally.
The diamond cutters took the job. Suddenly all those late nights of
reading long Russian novels became relevant to the business career I’d
stumbled into. I had been deeply ambivalent about becoming a boss
because I saw bosses as robotic dream-killers, Dilbert-like soul-crushers.
Now I realized the question that led me to study Russian literature—why
some people live productively and joyfully while others feel, as Marx put it,
alienated from their labor—was central to a boss’s job. In fact, part of my
job was to figure out how to create more joy and less misery. My humanity
was an attribute, not a liability, to being effective.

Two years after this picnic, I’d arranged for these men’s first travel
outside their homeland; helped them to come to grips with the dissonance
they felt between the world they saw and what their Soviet education had
led them to expect; improved their English; and hung out with their
families. They had cut diamonds for our company that sold in excess of
$100 million per year.
* * *
IT SEEMS OBVIOUS that good bosses must care personally about the people

who report directly to them. Very few people start out their careers thinking,
I don’t give a damn about people, so I think I’ll be a great boss. And yet, it
happens all too often that employees feel they’re being treated as pawns on
a chessboard, or as inferiors—not just in a corporate hierarchy but on a
fundamental human level.
Part of the reason why people fail to “care personally” is the injunction
to “keep it professional.” That phrase denies something essential. We are all
human beings, with human feelings, and, even at work, we need to be seen
as such. When that doesn’t happen, when we feel we must repress who we
really are to earn a living, we become alienated. That makes us hate going
to work. To most bosses, being professional means: show up at work on
time, do your job, don’t show feelings (unless engaged in “motivation” or
some such end-driven effort). The result is that nobody feels comfortable
being who they really are at work.
Fred Kofman, my coach at Google, had a mantra that contradicted the
“just professional” approach so destructive to so many managers: “Bring
your whole self to work.” This saying has become a meme; Google it and
you’ll get more than eight million results. Sheryl Sandberg referred to it in
her 2012 commencement address at Harvard, author Mike Robbins devoted
a TEDx talk to it in 2016, and Stewart Butterfield, Slack’s CEO, has made it
a priority for his company. Bringing your whole self to work is one of those
concepts that’s hard to define precisely, but you develop a feel for it when

you start to open up to it. This often means modeling the behavior yourself
by showing some vulnerability to the people who report to you—or just
admitting when you’re having a bad day—and creating a safe space for
others to do the same.
In addition to the obsessive devotion to “professionalism,” there’s
another, less virtuous reason why people fail to “care personally.” When
they become a boss, some people consciously or unconsciously begin to
feel they’re better or smarter than the people who work for them. That
attitude makes it impossible to be a kick-ass boss; it just makes people want
to kick your ass. There are few things more damaging to human
relationships than a sense of superiority. That’s why I detest the word
“superior” as a synonym for “boss.” I also avoid the word “employee.” I
once worked for a man who told me, “In every relationship there is a
screwer and a screwee.” Needless to say, I didn’t work for him for long. Of
course, if you are a boss, there is some hierarchy involved. There’s no use
pretending otherwise. Just remember that being a boss is a job, not a value
judgment.
Caring personally is the antidote to both robotic professionalism and
managerial arrogance. Why do I say “caring personally” instead of just
“caring”? Because it’s not enough to care about the person’s work or the
person’s career. Only when you actually care about the whole person with
your whole self can you build a relationship.
Caring personally is not about memorizing birthdays and names of
family members. Nor is it about sharing the sordid details of one’s personal
life, or forced chitchat at social events you’d rather not attend. Caring
personally is about doing things you already know how to do. It’s about
acknowledging that we are all people with lives and aspirations that extend
beyond those related to our shared work. It’s about finding time for real
conversations; about getting to know each other at a human level; about
learning what’s important to people; about sharing with one another what
makes us want to get out of bed in the morning and go to work—and what
has the opposite effect.

It isn’t simply a matter of allowing your approach to your
responsibilities to show that you care, however; you must also care deeply
about people while being prepared to be hated in return. The movie
Miracle, which is centered around the head coach of the 1980 U.S. men’s
Olympic ice hockey team, depicts this really well. Head coach Herb Brooks
unifies his team by pushing them so hard that he becomes the common
enemy. It’s clear watching the movie how much he cares about each player,
and it’s painful to watch how long it takes the players to see it. Being the
boss can feel like a lonely one-way street at times—especially at first. That
is OK. If you can absorb the blows, the members of your team are more
likely to be good bosses to their employees, when they have them. Once
people know what it feels like to have a good boss, it’s more natural for
them to want to be a good boss. They may never repay you, but they are
likely to pay it forward. The rewards of watching people you care about
flourish and then help others flourish are enormous.

CHALLENGE DIRECTLY: THE SECOND DIMENSION OF
RADICAL CANDOR
THE PHILOSOPHER JOSHUA Cohen, who taught executives at Twitter and Apple

and students at Stanford and MIT, does a great job of explaining why
challenging each other is essential not just to doing great work but to
building great relationships. He often uses this quote from John Stuart Mill:
The source of everything respectable in man either as an intellectual or as a moral being [is]
that his errors are corrigible. He is capable of rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and
experience. Not by experience alone. There must be discussion, to show how experience is to
be interpreted.

Challenging others and encouraging them to challenge you helps build
trusting relationships because it shows 1) you care enough to point out both
the things that aren’t going well and those that are and that 2) you are
willing to admit when you’re wrong and that you are committed to fixing
mistakes that you or others have made. But because challenging often

involves disagreeing or saying no, this approach embraces conflict rather
than avoiding it.
Former Secretary of State Colin Powell once remarked that being
responsible sometimes means pissing people off.1 You have to accept that
sometimes people on your team will be mad at you. In fact, if nobody is
ever mad at you, you probably aren’t challenging your team enough. The
key, as in any relationship, is how you handle the anger. When what you say
hurts, acknowledge the other person’s pain. Don’t pretend it doesn’t hurt or
say it “shouldn’t” hurt—just show that you care. Eliminate the phrase
“don’t take it personally” from your vocabulary—it’s insulting. Instead,
offer to help fix the problem. But don’t pretend it isn’t a problem just to try
to make somebody feel better. In the end, caring personally about people
even as you challenge them will build the best relationships of your career.
The “challenge directly” part of this program can be particularly
difficult, especially at the outset. You may have to criticize somebody’s
work or change their role while you are still in the process of establishing
that trust. I’ll dedicate a good deal of time to showing you how to do this
throughout the book. But that’s not the hardest part. The hardest part of
building this trust is inviting people to challenge you, just as directly as you
are challenging them. You have to encourage them to challenge you directly
enough that you may be the one who feels upset or angry. This takes some
getting used to—particularly for more “authoritarian” leaders. But if you
stick to it, you’ll find that you learn a great deal about yourself and how
people perceive you. This knowledge will unfailingly allow you and your
team to achieve better results.
* * *
MY COFOUNDER RUSS recently hired Elisse Lockhart to lead Candor, Inc.’s

content marketing efforts. Russ is pretty opinionated about the way we
describe Radical Candor. Elisse was new to the team and so was holding
back her opinions. Russ, sensitive to not only this dynamic but also to the

fact he was her boss, was careful to make sure that he encouraged Elisse to
challenge both of us just as hard as we challenged her.
Building enough trust between people to enable reciprocal challenge
irrespective of reporting relationship takes time and attention. I saw a
winning moment in building that trust when Russ and Elisse were
collaborating on a blog post for our website. Elisse disagreed with some of
Russ’s suggested wording, and she said so. They went back and forth a few
times, and it seemed as if Elisse was going to back down. Sensing this, Russ
said, “If we have the data about what works, let’s look at the data, but if all
we have are opinions, let’s use yours,” borrowing from Jim Barksdale of
Netscape, but offering the opposite prescription. Russ agreed to Elisse’s
changes, and the data on reception to Elisse’s wording proved her right.
Emboldened, the next time she argued her perspective she did so even
more forcefully—so much so that she worried maybe she’d stepped over a
line with her boss. She hadn’t, and to make that clear Russ sent across the
“Help me, help you” Jerry Maguire clip. In the movie, Jerry and his client
Rod get in a big argument, and the punch line features Rod telling Jerry,
“See, that’s the difference between us—you think we’re fightin’, and I think
we’re finally talkin’!”

WHAT RADICAL CANDOR IS NOT
WE TALKED ABOUT the importance of humility. Radical Candor is not a

license to be gratuitously harsh or to “front-stab.” It’s not Radical Candor
just because you begin with the words, “Let me be Radically Candid with
you.” If you follow that phrase with words like, “You are a liar and I don’t
trust you,” or “You’re a dipshit,” you’ve just acted like a garden-variety
jerk. It’s not Radical Candor if you don’t show that you care personally.
Radical Candor is also not an invitation to nitpick. Challenging people
directly takes real energy—not only from the people you’re challenging but
from you as well. So do it only for things that really matter. A good rule of

thumb for any relationship is to leave three unimportant things unsaid each
day.
Radical Candor is not a hierarchical thing. To be Radically Candid, you
need to practice it “up,” “down,” and “sideways.” Even if your boss and
peers have not bought in to this method, you CAN create a Radically
Candid microcosm for yourself and the people on your team. You are
entitled to proceed with a little more caution with your boss and your peers.
But ultimately, if it’s not possible to be Radically Candid with your boss
and your peers, I’d recommend finding a different kind of work
environment if at all possible.
Radical Candor is not about schmoozing, nor is it about endless
extroversion that exhausts the introverts on your team or wears you out if
you happen to be the introvert. It’s not about getting drunk or driving gocarts or playing laser tag or having endless dinners with colleagues. Those
might be good ways to blow off steam, but activities like that take up a lot
of time and are not the most efficient way to help you get to know the
people you work with, or show them you care personally.
Radical Candor is not unique to the culture in Silicon Valley, nor is it
uniquely American. It’s human. In fact, it was while working for an Israeli
company that I began to develop my thinking about Radical Candor.

RADICAL CANDOR IS UNIVERSALLY HUMAN, BUT
INTERPERSONALLY AND CULTURALLY RELATIVE
BOTH DIMENSIONS OF Radical Candor are sensitive to context. They get

measured at the listener’s ear, not at the speaker’s mouth. Radical Candor is
not a personality type or a talent or a cultural judgment. Radical Candor
works only if the other person understands that your efforts at caring
personally and challenging directly are delivered in good faith.
We have to be constantly aware of the fact that what seemed Radically
Candid to one person or team may feel too obnoxious (or too touchy-feely)
to another. Radical Candor requires even more adjustment when we go

from one company to another, and more yet when we go from one country
to another. What worked in one culture won’t translate directly to another.
* * *
on to Radical Candor, Israeli-style. Shortly after I
graduated from business school, I took a job with Deltathree, a voice-over
IP start-up based in Jerusalem. I was raised in the American South, where
people will do almost anything to avoid conflict or argument. In Israel, the
opposite was true. Conversations seemed to take on a particularly brutal
directness. I’ll never forget overhearing Noam Bardin, Deltathree’s COO,
yelling at an engineer, “That design could be fifteen times more efficient.
You know you could have built it better. Now we’re going to have to rip
what you did out and start over. We’ve lost a month, and for what? What
were you thinking?”
That seemed harsh. Rude, even …
I began to understand the Israeli culture better when Jacob Ner-David,
one of Deltathree’s co-founders, invited me over to his home in Jerusalem
for Shabbat dinner. His wife, Haviva Ner-David, was studying to be a rabbi,
something rare in the Orthodox community. She had come under attack
from a number of people in their synagogue. Jacob was enormously
supportive of her, and together the two of them explained how they
approached traditional doctrine. The way Jacob and his wife questioned
ancient interpretations of scripture somehow reminded me of how Noam
challenged his engineer. If it was OK to challenge and reinterpret God’s
doctrine, of course it was not a sign of disrespect to argue vehemently with
each other. I’d been raised in a very different culture. Where I grew up it
wasn’t uncommon to believe that God created the world in precisely seven
days and consider any mention of evolution heresy. I wasn’t a Creationist
any more than Noam was an Orthodox Jew, but somehow the religious
cultures of our youth had an impact on our willingness to challenge each
NOW LET’S MOVE

other at work. I realized I should take Noam’s challenges as a sign of
respect rather than rudeness.
I had a very different experience when I managed a team in Tokyo a few
years later. The team was enormously frustrated with how the Product team
at Google’s U.S. headquarters was approaching ads in mobile applications.
Yahoo! was growing its business quickly, and there were a number of
Japanese competitors not far behind. But the Japanese team was too polite
to make the problems clear to the team responsible for product
management, so they weren’t getting fixed. When I pushed them to
challenge the approach to mobile applications at Google headquarters, the
team just stared at me as though I were crazy.
Trying to get the team in Tokyo to challenge authority the way Noam
Bardin did in Jerusalem wouldn’t have worked. The kind of argument that
would be taken as a sign of respect in Tel Aviv would have been offensive
in Tokyo. Even the term “Radical Candor” would’ve felt too aggressive. I
found my own Southern upbringing helpful in understanding the Japanese
perspective: both cultures placed a great emphasis on manners and on not
contradicting people in public. So I encouraged that team in Tokyo to be
“politely persistent.” Being polite was their preferred way of showing they
cared personally. Being persistent was the way they were most comfortable
challenging Google’s product direction.
I was gratified to see the results. The team in Tokyo became not just
persistent but relentless in their campaign to be heard. Thanks in part to
their polite persistence, a new product, AdSense for Mobile Applications,
was born.
Another of my favorite Radical Candor stories is that of Roy Zhou, who
worked for Russ and led the AdSense team in China. At first he was
extremely deferential to Russ and me, but once we convinced him we really
wanted to be challenged, he let it rip. He was a real pleasure to work with—
and one of the most Radically Candid managers at Google. A few years
ago, he got the opportunity to become president of Yoyi Digital, a fivehundred-person online advertising platform in Beijing. After a few months,

he discovered some significant problems with the business. He came clean
about them to his board and to all employees. Roy went to extraordinary
lengths to show his team that he cared personally and was going to do
everything he could to help them be successful. Not only did he make sure
they got significant equity, he mortgaged his home before a new round of
financing so they could be paid on time. Now Roy is running one of the
most successful businesses in China.
I’ve led teams all over the world. The most surprising thing I’ve learned
is that Brits, despite all their politeness, tend to be even more candid than
New Yorkers. This is thanks to an education system that stresses oral
argument as much as written. But, I’ve seen firsthand that it’s possible to
adapt Radical Candor equally well for Tel Aviv and Tokyo, for Beijing and
Berlin.

2.
GET, GIVE, AND ENCOURAGE
GUIDANCE
Creating a culture of open communication
THE “UM” STORY
SHORTLY AFTER I joined Google, I gave a presentation to Google’s CEO and

founders on the performance of AdSense. Despite the fact that AdSense
was doing great, and even though my boss was sitting next to me in a show
of support, I felt nervous. Luckily, we had a good story to tell: the business
was growing at an unprecedented rate. As I looked around the room, I
caught the eye of CEO Eric Schmidt, whose head had snapped out of his
computer when I’d declared how many new customers had signed up in the
past month. I’d distracted him from his email—a triumph! “How many did
you say?” he asked. I repeated the number, and he almost fell out of his
chair.
I couldn’t have asked for a better reaction. After I finished, I felt that
mix of euphoria and relief that follows a successful presentation. My boss
was waiting for me by the door and I half expected a high five. Instead, she
asked if I’d walk back to her office with her. I got a sinking feeling in my
stomach. Something hadn’t gone well. But what?

“You are going to have an amazing career here at Google,” Sheryl
began. She knew how to get my attention—I had three failed start-ups
under my belt and badly needed a win. “And your ability to be intellectually
honest about both sides of an argument, not just your own, bought you a lot
of credibility in there.” She mentioned three or four specific things I’d said
to illustrate her point. I’d been worried that I wasn’t arguing my points
vehemently enough, so this was welcome news to me. “I learned a lot today
from the way you handled those questions.” This didn’t feel like mere
flattery—I could tell from the way she stopped and looked me in the eye
that she meant it. She wanted me to register that something I’d been
worried about being a weakness was actually a strength.
This was interesting, but I wanted to file it away to think about later.
That nagging feeling persisted in my stomach. There was an axe waiting to
fall here. What I really wanted to know was, what had I done wrong? “But
something didn’t go well, right?”
Sheryl laughed. “You always want to focus on what you could have
done better. Which I understand. I do, too. We learn more from failure than
success. But I want you to focus for a minute on what went well, because
overall it really did go well. This was a success.”
I listened as best I could. Finally, she said. “You said ‘um’ a lot. Were
you aware of it?”
“Yeah,” I replied. “I know I say that too much.” Surely she couldn’t be
taking this little walk with me just to talk about the “um” thing. Who cared
if I said “um” when I had a tiger by the tail?
“Was it because you were nervous? Would you like me to recommend a
speech coach for you? Google will pay for it.”
“I didn’t feel nervous,” I said, making a brushing-off gesture with my
hand as though I were shooing a bug away. “Just a verbal tic, I guess.”
“There’s no reason to let a small thing like a verbal tic trip you up.”
“I know.” I made another shoo-fly gesture with my hand.
Sheryl laughed. “When you do that thing with your hand, I feel like
you’re ignoring what I’m telling you. I can see I am going to have to be

really, really direct to get through to you. You are one of the smartest people
I know, but saying ‘um’ so much makes you sound stupid.”
Now that got my attention.
Sheryl repeated her offer to help. “The good news is a speaking coach
can really help with the ‘um’ thing. I know somebody who would be great.
You can definitely fix this.”

“OPERATIONALIZING” GOOD GUIDANCE
THINK FOR A moment about how Sheryl handled that situation. Even though

the overall talk had gone well, she didn’t let the positive result get in the
way of pointing out something I needed to fix. She did so immediately, so
that the problem didn’t hurt my reputation at Google. She made sure to
point out the positive things I’d accomplished in the presentation, and
what’s more, she did so thoroughly and sincerely—there was no attempt at
“sandwiching” the criticism between bogus positives. Her first approach
was gentle but direct. When it became clear that I wasn’t hearing her, she
became more direct, but even then she was careful not to “personalize,” not
to make it about some essential trait. She said I “sounded” stupid rather
than I was stupid. And I wasn’t in this alone: she offered tangible help. I
didn’t feel like an idiot with defects, but a valuable team member she was
ready to invest in. But it still stung a little bit.
This conversation was extremely effective on two counts. First, it made
me want to solve my “um” problem immediately; after only three sessions
with a speech coach, I had made noticeable improvement. Second, it made
me appreciate Sheryl and inspired me to give better guidance to my team.
The way she gave praise and criticism got me thinking about how to teach
other people how to adopt this style of management.
All this from a two-minute encounter.
* * *

WOW. HOW MANY times have you tried to give feedback that totally falls

flat? How can you, like Sheryl, give guidance in a way that confronts a
specific situation and creates ripple effects that change how everyone
communicates?
I have spent the decade since that encounter coaching the next
generation of Silicon Valley leaders to change their approach to guidance—
both praise and criticism. It’s surprisingly simple. Anyone can learn it.
There are two dimensions to good guidance: care personally and challenge
directly. As discussed in chapter one, when you do both at the same time,
it’s Radical Candor. It’s also useful to be clear about what happens when
you fail in one dimension (Ruinous Empathy), the other (Obnoxious
Aggression), or both (Manipulative Insincerity). Being clear about what
happens when you fail to care personally or challenge directly will help you
avoid backsliding into old habits too common to all of us.
Many of the people I coach have found this framework helpful in being
more conscious of what kind of guidance they are getting, giving, and
encouraging. Another essential thing I stress with my clients: it’s vital to
remember that very important lesson from the “um” story—don’t
personalize. The names of each quadrant refer to guidance, not to
personality traits. They are a way to gauge praise and criticism, and to help
people remember to do a better job offering both. They are not to be used to
label people. Labeling hinders improvement. Ultimately, everyone spends
some time in each of the quadrants. We are all imperfect. I’ve never met
anyone who is always Radically Candid. To repeat, this is not a “personality
test.”

Let’s walk through the quadrants.

RADICAL CANDOR
GUIDANCE DOESN’T JUST come at work. Every so often, a stranger offers

some Radical Candor, and it can change your life if you’re listening. This
happened to me shortly after I adopted a golden retriever puppy named
Belvedere. I adored Belvedere and spoiled her utterly. As a result, she was
completely out of control. One evening we were out for a walk, and Belvy
began to tug at her leash as we waited at a crosswalk, even though cars
were speeding by only a few feet in front of us. “Come on sweetie, sit,” I
implored. “The light will be green in a second.” Despite my reassurances,
she yanked even harder on the leash and tried to lunge into the street.
A stranger also waiting to cross looked over at me and said, “I can see
you really love your dog.” In the two seconds it took him to say those
words, he established that he cared, that he wasn’t judging me. Next, he
gave me a really direct challenge. “But that dog will die if you don’t teach
her to sit!” Direct, almost breathtakingly so. Then, without asking for
permission, the man bent down to Belvy, pointed his finger at the sidewalk,
and said with a loud, firm voice, “SIT!”
She sat. I gaped in amazement.
He smiled and explained, “It’s not mean. It’s clear!” The light changed
and he strode off, leaving me with words to live by.

Think for a second about how this might have gone down. The man
could have easily said something judgmental (“you have no right to own a
dog if you don’t know how to take care of one!”) and thus left me defensive
and unwilling to take his simple but essential advice. Instead, he
acknowledged my love for the dog, and explained why his recommendation
was the right way to go (not mean, clear!). There was a decent chance I
would tell him to go to hell and mind his own business, but he didn’t let that
stop him. He was, in his own way, a leader—and I suspect that he’s a good
boss in his day job. Granted, I didn’t form a relationship with him. But if I’d
worked with him instead of just bumping into him on the street, this little
interaction would have been the seed from which a relationship could grow.
I hope I’ve never spoken to a person like a dog, but I’ll never forget the
stranger’s words. “It’s not mean, it’s clear!” has become a management
mantra, helping me to avoid repeating the mistake I described in the
Introduction, which was not telling Bob when his work wasn’t good
enough. My efforts to be nice ended with my having to fire him. Not so nice
after all. That brief incident at the crosswalk taught me that I don’t have to
spend a lot of time getting to know a person or building trust before offering
Radically Candid guidance. In fact, a great way to get to know somebody
and to build trust is to offer Radically Candid praise and criticism.
Radically Candid praise
“I admire that about you”

Recently my cofounder Russ and I were filming a video tip for giving
Radically Candid praise. Russ was talking about why giving really specific

praise is important, and he gave an example from coaching Little League. “I
really admire that you are a Little League coach,” I said, offhandedly. I had
been meaning to tell him this for a while, and it just popped into my head in
the moment. He said, “Thank you.” Usually, that would’ve been that. But I
realized later that my compliment had not been specific—I hadn’t told Russ
why I admired that he was a coach. I mentioned the irony to Russ. He
replied, “Well, the real problem is that I don’t think you meant it—you hate
sports.” Now, I realized, it was even worse than I’d thought. It wasn’t just
that I’d been vague and unhelpful. He knew I cared about him, but he
thought my praise was insincere.
There we were, giving people advice on giving good praise, and here I
was, totally screwing it up! And it should have been easy, I was talking to
Russ, my cofounder and a person I’d known for years. Giving meaningful
praise is hard. That’s why it’s so important to gauge your guidance—to find
out how it lands for people. Now that I knew how Russ felt, I tried again.
“The other day I gave you a hard time about leaving early for practice,
and I then felt bad about it,” I began. “Because in fact I really admire that
you are a Little League coach. You do as good a job integrating your work
and your life as anyone I know. I always wonder if I’m spending enough
time with my kids, and the example you set by coaching helps me do better.
Also, the things you’ve learned from the Positive Coaching Alliance have
been enormously helpful in our work.”
This time, the comment was contextualized, far more personal, and
specific. And, this time, Russ said, “Now that was Radically Candid
praise!”
Radically Candid criticism
To keep winning, criticize the wins

Andre Iguodala, the swingman for the Golden State Warriors, explained
why being willing to challenge the people you work with is so important to
success. The secret to winning, he said, is to point out to great players what
they could have done better, even when they have just won a game.

Especially when they have just won a game. The problem with living at the
top of a hill is that you always have to walk uphill just to get back home. Of
course, Andre’s teammates weren’t always happy to hear his Radically
Candid criticism. They sometimes accused him of Obnoxious Aggression.
But, as we will see in the next section, Obnoxious Aggression looks and
feels very different.

OBNOXIOUS AGGRESSION
WHEN YOU CRITICIZE someone without taking even two seconds to show you

care, your guidance feels obnoxiously aggressive to the recipient. I regret to
say that if you can’t be Radically Candid, being obnoxiously aggressive is
the second best thing you can do. At least then people know what you think
and where they stand, so your team can achieve results. This explains the
advantage that assholes seem to have in the world.
Let me be clear. I refuse to work with people who can’t be bothered to
show basic human decency. I want you to keep your humanity intact. If
more people can be Radically Candid, there will be less reason to tolerate
Obnoxious Aggression.

But here’s a paradox of being a good boss. Most people prefer the
challenging “jerk” to the boss whose “niceness” gets in the way of candor. I
once read an article that claimed most people would rather work for a
“competent asshole” than a “nice incompetent.” This article was a useful

expression of the Catch-22 that worried me about being a boss. Of course I
didn’t want to be incompetent. Nor did I want to be an asshole.
Fortunately, the “asshole or incompetent” thing is a false dichotomy:
you don’t have to choose between those two extremes. Time and again, I
have seen that it was kinder in the long run to be direct, even if articulating
my criticism caused some momentary upset. (“It’s not mean, it’s clear!”)
Furthermore, it’s the fear of being labeled a jerk that pushes many people
toward Manipulative Insincerity or Ruinous Empathy—both of which are
actually worse for their colleagues than Obnoxious Aggression, as we’ll see
in later sections.
Still, Obnoxious Aggression is debilitating, particularly at the extreme.
When bosses belittle employees, embarrass them publicly, or freeze them
out, their behavior falls into this quadrant. This Obnoxious Aggression
sometimes gets great results short-term but leaves a trail of dead bodies in
its wake in the long run. Think about the Anna Wintour–inspired character
played by Meryl Streep in The Devil Wears Prada. Or Bobby Knight, the
Indiana basketball coach who had a winning record but was reported to
have thrown chairs and choked a player and was ultimately fired. When
bosses criticize others to humiliate them rather than to help them improve,
or permit personalized attacks among team members, or discourage praise
as “babysitting people’s egos,” their behavior feels obnoxiously aggressive
to the people around him.
The worst kind of Obnoxious Aggression happens when one person
really understands another’s vulnerabilities and then targets them, either for
sport or to assert dominance. I once had a boss who really knew how to
push my buttons—he possessed what I thought of as “cruel empathy.”
Almost nothing will erode trust more quickly than using one’s insights into
what makes another person tick to hurt them.
It happens all too often that bosses view employees as lesser beings who
can be degraded without conscience; that employees view their bosses as
tyrants to be toppled; and that peers view one another as enemy combatants.
When this is the toxic culture of guidance, criticism is a weapon rather than

a tool for improvement; it makes the giver feel powerful and the receiver
feel awful. Even praise can feel more like a backhanded compliment than a
celebration of work well done. “Well, you got it right this time.”
Obnoxiously aggressive criticism
Front-stabbing

Let’s take the example of criticism offered by a former colleague whom
I’ll refer to as “Ned.” Ned organized a party for his global team and asked
people to come in their national costumes. The culture of the company was
whimsical, and everybody came dressed in goofy outfits. Ned, who was
new to the company, came in an expensive tux. I guess he felt silly being so
absurdly overdressed for his own party, and to cope with his own
insecurities he went into belittling mode. He strode up to a friend of mine,
one of his new direct reports, who had dressed as a leprechaun for the party.
In front of a large crowd, Ned bellowed at my friend, “I said to dress in
your national costume, not to dress like a fool!”
It’s tempting to dismiss Ned as a jerk, but this is exactly the kind of
attribution error that Radical Candor teaches us to avoid. Blaming people’s
internal essence rather than their external behavior leaves no room for
change. And why had Ned never changed? Because nobody ever bothered
to challenge his behavior, and so he never had to learn. His obnoxiousness
just escalated.
I’m not proud to admit that I was a silent party to this. I was standing
right there when Ned told my friend that he looked like a fool, and I didn’t
say anything. Nor did I say anything later to Ned in private. Why? Because
I had already dismissed Ned as an asshole, and therefore deemed him not
worth talking to. So I was making the fundamental attribution error, and my
behavior was “manipulatively insincere.” I’m still ashamed of that. If ever
anyone needed a dose of Radical Candor, it was Ned.
Remember, Obnoxious Aggression is a behavior, not a personality trait.
Nobody is a bona fide asshole all the time. Not even Ned. And all of us are
obnoxiously aggressive some of the time. This includes me, unfortunately. I

will assert that I am not usually a jerk, but here’s a time when I behaved like
one:
A couple of months after joining Google, I had a disagreement with
Larry Page about his approach to a policy. In a fit of frustration, I sent an
email to about thirty people, including Larry, which said, “Larry claims he
wants to organize the world’s information, but his policy is creating ‘clutter
sites,’ muddling the world’s information.” I went on to imply that he was
recommending the policy because he was focused on increasing Google’s
revenue rather than doing the right thing for users.
If Larry had worked for me instead of the other way around, I would
never have sent such an arrogant, accusatory email. I would have asked him
privately why he was proposing a policy that seemed to be in violation of
Google’s mission. If I agreed with his rationale, that would have been that.
If I disagreed, I would have explained—again, privately—that he seemed
inconsistent and tried to understand his rationale. I didn’t do any of that
with Larry, though. If I had, of course, I would have learned that he was not
just fifteen, but more like 115 steps ahead of me. I simply didn’t understand
how things worked yet.
Why did I behave this way? Partly because I believe there’s a special
place in hell for those who “kick down and kiss up.” At least I wasn’t
making that mistake. And yet my mistake was simply the other side of the
same coin. I wasn’t really thinking of Larry as a human being. I saw him as
a kind of demigod whom I could attack with impunity. Fundamental human
decency is something every person owes every other, regardless of position.
And it wasn’t as though Larry was shut down to criticism, as I had seen in
his conversation with Matt Cutts. He’d given me no reason to be so strident.
The incident with Larry is a good example of how criticism can be
obnoxiously aggressive if you don’t care personally. I probably thought I
was being Radically Candid—“speaking truth to power”—but I wasn’t. It
was a clear-cut case of “front-stabbing.” Better than backstabbing, but still
really bad.

The first problem with my email was that it wasn’t humble. I had just
joined the company, and I didn’t understand much about how Google’s
systems worked. Nor had I bothered to find out why Larry might be taking
the stance he was taking. Instead, I just made a bunch of assumptions and
concluded—wrongly, as it turned out—that Larry was more concerned with
making money than he was with Google’s mission. Furthermore, my
suggestions were not at all helpful because I didn’t fully understand the
underlying issue that Larry was trying to address. My other miscalculation
was criticizing Larry in a public forum, rather than in private, which would
have been the respectful thing to do. And worst of all, I personalized. I
should have been talking about the AdSense policy, but instead I attacked
Larry’s character, implicitly accusing him of being greedy and hypocritical.
As I would see over and over in the next six years at Google, Larry was
certainly neither of those things. He was fair and consistent. But the point
here is that I shouldn’t have been talking about Larry’s character, either
positively or negatively. I was personalizing.
Obnoxiously aggressive praise
Belittling compliments

Praise can be obnoxiously aggressive, too. Consider this email that a
boss at a legendary Silicon Valley company sent out to his team of about six
hundred people, seventy of whom had just gotten bonuses. I’ve removed the
names to avoid embarrassing these people further:
From: JohnDoe <JohnDoe@corpx.com>
Date: April 27 at 11:53 AM
Subject: Bonus Winners!
To: giantteam@corpx.com
Dear Giant Team,
In Q3 there was a number of you that really excelled and went above and beyond the rest of
us to deliver significant impact to Corpx. These team members and their accomplishments
have been recognized with the Q3 spot bonus attributed by the Management Team. I want to

take this opportunity to share who these extraordinary people are and provide you an
overview of their accomplishments in the list below.
--John
John Doe
Vice President, Giant Team
Worldwide

■ Person 33: level 5 seller, he drove the highest QTD revenue of any display seller: $7.5M
in Q3. His comp at $70k base and OTE of $116k is 50% below market; retention risk.

■ Person 39: she has done all of the dirty work in getting XYZ off the ground with endless
spreadsheets, updates, legal calls, and has done a great job (well above her level 3 status).

■ Person 72: exceptional effort in the past 4+ months. Additional responsibility covering
John Doe.

Imagine how Person 33 felt when he saw that his private compensation
information had been sent out to six hundred people. I doubt it made him
feel better to learn that he was being paid half of what he should have been
and that his boss thought he was probably looking for other jobs!
Just think how motivating it must have been for Person 39 to learn that
she did all the “dirty work.” I doubt it was any consolation to learn she was
“well above her level 3 status.” At least there was some comedy in the fact
that Person 72 had to be given a bonus for “covering John.” In other words,
John Doe was such a jerk that the company had to pay people a bonus if
they worked closely with him.
Even if you give John Doe the benefit of the doubt and assume he was
simply lazy and/or tin-eared rather than intentionally hurtful, it’s
indubitable that he was not demonstrating that he cared personally about his
people. He had obviously gathered this information by asking all the
managers who worked for him to send him a justification for the bonus. But
he cared so little about the people he was praising that he didn’t even bother
to read the justifications. He just copied and pasted them into a new email
and fired it off. It’s not easy to pay people a compliment backed up by a big

bonus and make them feel worse rather than better, but John Doe’s email
pulled that off.

MANIPULATIVE INSINCERITY
MANIPULATIVELY INSINCERE GUIDANCE happens when you don’t care enough

about a person to challenge directly. People give praise and criticism that is
manipulatively insincere when they are too focused on being liked or think
they can gain some sort of political advantage by being fake—or when they
are just too tired to care or argue any more. Guidance that is manipulatively
insincere rarely reflects what the speaker actually thinks; rather, it’s an
attempt to push the other person’s emotional buttons in return for some
personal gain. “He’ll be happy if I tell him I liked his stupid presentation,
and that will make my life easier than explaining why it sucked. In the long
run, though, I really need to find someone to replace him.”

Apple’s Chief Design Officer Jony Ive told a story about a time when he
pulled his punches when criticizing his team’s work. When Steve Jobs
asked Jony why he hadn’t been more clear about what was wrong, Jony
replied, “Because I care about the team.” To which Steve replied, “No,
Jony, you’re just really vain. You just want people to like you.” Recounting
the story, Jony said, “I was terribly cross because I knew he was right.”
That’s why Colin Powell said leadership is sometimes about being
willing to piss people off. When you are overly worried about how people
will perceive you, you’re less willing to say what needs to be said. Like

Jony, you may feel it’s because you care about the team, but really, in those
all-too-human moments you may care too much about how they feel about
you—in other words, about yourself. I’ve been there, too. We all have.
Give a damn about the people you challenge. Worrying about whether
or not they give a damn about you, however, is not “caring personally”
about them, and it’s likely to push you in the wrong direction on the
“challenge directly” axis. That’s not going to help your team achieve great
results, or take a step in the direction of their dreams. Let go of vanity and
care personally. But if you don’t care, don’t waste your time and everyone
else’s by trying to fake it.
Unfortunately, conventional wisdom and a lot of management advice
pushes bosses to challenge less, rather than encouraging them to care more.
Generally, the resulting praise and criticism feels to employees like flattery
or backstabbing. Needless to say, this doesn’t build trust between boss and
direct report.
Manipulatively insincere praise
The false apology

Let’s go back to my obnoxiously aggressive email to Larry Page. After
it went out, a couple of people called me up and asked me why the hell I’d
sent it. I realized I’d been unbelievably rude, and I felt ashamed—and a
little scared. What had I been thinking?
I still didn’t understand why my assessment of Larry’s new policy was
wrong, but now I was more concerned with keeping my job. So the next
time I saw Larry, I stopped him and said, “I’m sorry about that email, Larry.
I know you are right.” Now, there would have been nothing wrong with
apologizing for the tone I’d taken, but instead, without explanation, I
abruptly reversed my intellectual position. My insincerity was obvious, and
it was exactly the wrong move. Larry had a finely tuned BS meter, and I’m
not a very good liar. He said nothing, but his look of disdain spoke volumes.
As Larry walked away, a colleague standing nearby smiled in sympathetic

solidarity and muttered to me, “He likes it better when you disagree with
him.”
When you behave badly and get called out for it, an all-too-natural
response is to become less genuine and more political—to move from
Obnoxious Aggression to a worse place, Manipulative Insincerity. It
would’ve been better to have said nothing than to move in the wrong
direction on the “challenge directly” axis. Better yet to have moved up on
the care personally axis—to have taken the trouble to understand Larry’s
thinking and then come up with a solution that addressed his concerns and
mine. In that context, admitting that I had behaved badly would probably
have been better received.

RUINOUS EMPATHY
THERE’S A RUSSIAN anecdote about a guy who has to amputate his dog’s tail

but loves him so much that he cuts it off an inch each day, rather than all at
once. His desire to spare the dog pain and suffering only leads to more pain
and suffering. Don’t allow yourself to become that kind of boss!
This is an extreme example of what I call Ruinous Empathy. Ruinous
Empathy is responsible for the vast majority of management mistakes I’ve
seen in my career. Most people want to avoid creating tension or discomfort
at work. They are like the well-meaning parent who cannot bear to
discipline their kids. They are like me with my dog Belvy.
Bosses rarely intend to ruin an employee’s chance of success or to
handicap the entire team by letting poor performance slide. And yet that is
often the net result of Ruinous Empathy. Similarly, praise that’s ruinously
empathetic is not effective because its primary goal is to make the person
feel better rather than to point out really great work and push for more of it.
These were the painful mistakes I made in the story from the Introduction
with Bob, whom I didn’t criticize and then had to fire.
Ruinous Empathy can also prevent a boss from asking for criticism.
Typically, when a boss asks an employee for criticism, the employee feels

awkward at best, afraid at worst. Instead of pushing through the discomfort
to get an employee to challenge them, bosses who are being ruinously
empathetic may be so eager to ease the awkwardness that they simply let
the matter drop.
When bosses are too invested in everyone getting along, they also fail to
encourage the people on their team to criticize one another for fear of
sowing discord. They create the kind of work environment where “being
nice” is prioritized at the expense of critiquing, and therefore, improving
actual performance.
Bosses often make the mistake of thinking that if they hang out in the
Ruinous Empathy quadrant they can build a relationship with their direct
reports and then move over to Radical Candor. They’re pleasant to work
with, but as time goes by their employees start to realize that the only
guidance they’ve received is “good job” and other vaguely positive
comments. They know they’ve done some things wrong, but they’re not
sure what, exactly. Their direct reports never know where they stand, and
they aren’t being given an opportunity to learn or grow; they often stall or
get fired. Not such a great way to build a relationship. On the flip side,
when Ruinous Empathy prevents bosses from soliciting criticism, they have
no idea anything is wrong until a person quits. Needless to say, this strategy
does not build trust on either side.
Ruinously empathetic praise
“Just trying to say something nice”

A friend of mine told a cautionary tale about “just trying to say
something nice” as a leader. Wandering around at 2 A.M. the night before a
launch, he bumped into an engineer, “Anatoly,” and asked him about a
particular feature. Anatoly answered his question, and told him about
several important aspects of the feature. A couple of days later, when
celebrating the launch, my friend congratulated Anatoly on his excellent
work on the feature in front of the whole company.

Problem was, Anatoly was only one of a handful of strong engineers on
the project. All the other engineers who had worked on it now thought that
Anatoly had claimed credit for the feature himself. Embarrassed, Anatoly
sent out an email to the whole company, listing all the people who had
worked on the project with him.
My friend realized he had been ruinously empathetic. He was just trying
to make Anatoly happy by praising him, but he’d accidentally thrown him
under the bus. My friend’s suggestion to managers who worked at his
company: when giving praise, investigate until you really understand who
did what and why it was so great. Be as specific and thorough with praise as
with criticism. Go deep into the details.

MOVING TOWARD RADICAL CANDOR
OFTEN WHEN I talk to people about developing a culture of Radical Candor,

they agree with the idea but feel nervous about putting it into practice. My
advice is to start by explaining the idea and then asking people to be
Radically Candid with you. Start by getting feedback, in other words, not by
dishing it out. Then when you do start giving it, start with praise, not
criticism. When you move on to criticism, make sure you understand where
the perilous border between Radical Candor and Obnoxious Aggression is.
Start by asking for criticism, not by giving it
Don’t dish it out before you show you can take it

There are several reasons why it makes sense to begin building a culture
of Radical Candor by asking people to criticize you. First, it’s the best way
to show that you are aware that you are often wrong, and that you want to
hear about it when you are; you want to be challenged. Second, you’ll learn
a lot—few people scrutinize you as closely as do those who report to you.
Maybe it will prevent you from sending out ill-conceived emails like the
one I sent to Larry. Third, the more firsthand experience you have with how
it feels to receive criticism, the better idea you’ll have of how your own

guidance lands for others. Fourth, asking for criticism is a great way to
build trust and strengthen your relationships.
Bosses get Radically Candid guidance from their teams not merely by
being open to criticism but by actively soliciting it. If a person is bold
enough to criticize you, do not critique their criticism. If you see somebody
criticizing a peer inappropriately, say something. But if somebody criticizes
you inappropriately, your job is to listen with the intent to understand and
then to reward the candor. Just as important as soliciting criticism is
encouraging it between your team members. (You can find specific tools
and techniques for soliciting and encouraging guidance from your
employees in Part II, Chapter Six.)
When I worked at Google, it was often the people on the team in Dublin
who’d come out with the most memorable criticism for me. These zingers
were enormously helpful, once I got over the momentary sting. David
Johnson once said to me after I’d sent out a particularly ill-advised email,
“Kim, you’re awfully fast to hit Send!” To this day, I still hear the warning
voice of David before I hit Send. And even though I haven’t seen him in
years, he continues to save me almost weekly from sending a note I’ll
regret.
Another time I delayed the start of a meeting with the team in Dublin
because I didn’t want to cut short my morning hour with my newborn twins.
I thought everyone would understand, but a young father on the call fired
back, “Ya know, Kim, we have children, too!” I’d unthinkingly pushed the
meeting into their dinner hour. I was deeply ashamed but, once I’d gotten
over feeling defensive, also grateful to him for pointing it out.
The key to soliciting criticism from the Dublin team was not to react
defensively. The difficulty in soliciting criticism from the team I worked
with in Japan, however, was enduring the silence. I’ll never forget my first
meeting with the AdSense team in Tokyo. My plan was to hold regular
meetings with them to ask for suggestions, concerns, improvements. My
previous experience in such meetings in other countries had been that if I
asked a question like, “Is there anything I could do or stop doing that would

make your lives better?” and then counted to six in my head, somebody
would say something. I counted to ten. Crickets. I asked a different way.
Still, crickets. Finally, I told them a story about Toyota that I’d learned in
business school. Wanting to combat the cultural taboos against criticizing
management, Toyota’s leaders painted a big red square on the assembly line
floor. New employees had to stand in it at the end of their first week, and
they were not allowed to leave until they had criticized at least three things
on the line. The continual improvement this practice spawned was part of
Toyota’s success. I asked my team what they thought: did we need a red
box? They laughed, and, fearing I might just paint a red box somewhere,
somebody opened up just a tiny bit. It wasn’t much, frankly—a complaint
about the tea in the office—but I rewarded the candor handsomely. I
thanked the person publicly, I sent a handwritten note, I approved funds to
make sure there was better tea, and I made sure everyone knew that there
was better tea now because somebody had complained about it in the
meeting. Later, more substantive issues got raised.
Balance praise and criticism
Worry more about praise, less about criticism—but above all be sincere

We learn more from our mistakes than our successes, more from
criticism than from praise. Why, then, is it important to give more praise
than criticism? Several reasons. First, it guides people in the right direction.
It’s just as important to let people know what to do more of as what to do
less of. Second, it encourages people to keep improving. In other words, the
best praise does a lot more than just make people feel good. It can actually
challenge them directly.
Some professionals say you need to have a praise-to-criticism ratio of
3:1, 5:1, or even 7:1. Others advocate the “feedback sandwich”—opening
and closing with praise, sticking some criticism in between. I think venture
capitalist Ben Horowitz got it right when he called this approach the “shit
sandwich.” Horowitz suggests that such a technique might work with less-

experienced people, but I’ve found the average child sees through it just as
clearly as an executive does.
In other words, the notion of a “right” ratio between praise and criticism
is dangerous, because it can lead you to say things that are unnatural,
insincere, or just plain ridiculous. If you think that you must come up with,
say, two good things for every bad thing you tell somebody, you’ll find
yourself saying things like, “Wow, the font you chose for that presentation
really blew me away. But the content bordered on the obvious.… Still, it
really impresses me how neat your desk always is.” Patronizing or insincere
praise like that will erode trust and hurt your relationships just as much as
overly harsh criticism.
In the case of criticism, most people are nervous about hurting
someone’s feelings, so they often say nothing. In the case of praise, some
people are eager to please those around them, so they always say something
—sometimes inane things. Other people just aren’t in the habit of giving
praise. If I’m not firing you, it means you’re doing fine. That’s not good
enough. Andy Grove told me he realized it was time to get better at praising
people when somebody put a laminated plaque reading SAY SOMETHING NICE!
in his cubicle.
When I am criticizing, I try to be less nervous, and focus on “just saying
it.” If I think too much about how to say it I’m likely to wimp out and say
nothing. And when I am praising, I try to be at least aware of how praise
can go wrong, and put more energy into thinking about how to say it. Karen
Sipprell, a colleague at Apple, asked two questions that were instructive:
“How long do you spend making sure you have all the facts right before
you criticize somebody? How long do you spend making sure you have all
the facts right before you praise somebody?” Ideally you’d spend just as
long getting the facts right for praise as for criticism.
Understand the perilous border between Obnoxious Aggression and
Radical Candor
“Your work is shit”

Radically Candid criticism is an important part of the culture at both
Google and Apple, but it takes very different forms at the two companies.
Google emphasizes caring personally more than challenging directly, so I’d
describe criticism there as Radical Candor with a twist of Ruinous
Empathy. Apple does the opposite, so I’d describe its culture of criticism as
Radical Candor with a twist of Obnoxious Aggression.
In the Introduction, I described briefly a documentary in which tech
journalist Bob Cringely interviews Steve Jobs and asks what he means
when he tells people “your work is shit.”1 It’s worth reading the transcript to
explore the perilous border between Obnoxious Aggression and Radical
Candor.
CRINGELY: What does it mean when you tell someone their work is shit?
JOBS: It usually means their work is shit. Sometimes it means, “I think your work is shit. And

I—I’m wrong.”

Saying “your work is shit” is generally not OK. It’s deep in the
“Obnoxious Aggression” quadrant. But later in the interview with Cringely,
Jobs clarified his thoughts about what he said.
JOBS: The most important thing I think you can do for somebody who’s really good and who’s

really being counted on is to point out to them when they’re not—when their work isn’t good
enough. And to do it very clearly and to articulate why … and to get them back on track.

Notice that Jobs catches himself. He’s careful not to personalize the
criticism—not to say “when they’re not good enough.” Instead, he says
“when their work isn’t good enough.” It’s an important distinction. Jobs is
struggling with a common problem that arises when criticizing another
person: the fundamental attribution error, which highlights the role of
personal traits rather than external causes. It’s easier to find fault in that
person than to look for the fault within the context of what that person is
doing. It’s easier to say, “You’re sloppy” than to say, “You’ve been working

nights and weekends, and it’s starting to take a toll on your ability to catch
mistakes in your logic.” But it’s also far less helpful.
Saying “your work is shit” is way better than saying “you are shit,” but
it’s still totally obnoxious. What Jobs says next is key, though: for criticism
to be effective, it’s crucial “to do it very clearly and to articulate why … and
to get them back on track.” [My italics.] In other words, “your work is
shit,” even stated less aggressively, is not enough. The boss needs to explain
why; that is, be invested in helping the person improve. Toward the end of
the interview, Jobs offers some explanation of why he chose the words he
did.
JOBS: You need to do that in a way that does not call into question your confidence in their

abilities but leaves not too much room for interpretation … and that’s a hard thing to do. [My
italics.]

“Your work is shit” certainly doesn’t leave any room for interpretation,
but I expect for most people it might also call into question confidence in
their ability. Far be it for me to justify this word choice, but there are a
couple of reasons why it might not be as bad as it sounds to say such a
thing. First, the nature of the relationship is key. In the Introduction, I told a
story about a time I called a guy on my team a dumbass. I’m not advocating
you do the same. I’m just saying that because of the relationship we had, I
knew that he knew I admired him tremendously and that I only used those
words to get his attention. Second, it might be the case, particularly when
you’re dealing with highly accomplished people, that you have to go to
some extremes to break through their tendency to filter out critical
messages.
Jobs does articulate why guidance often involves walking a knife’s
edge. I have always found it enormously difficult to reassure people that I
have confidence in their abilities while simultaneously making it clear that I
think the work is not good enough. Being extremely clear about the quality
of the work can sometimes feel like you’re just being mean.

How do you criticize without discouraging the person? First, as I
described in Chapter One, focus on your relationship. Also, as I described
in the previous two sections: ask for criticism before giving it, and offer
more praise than criticism. Be humble, helpful, offer guidance in person and
immediately, praise in public, criticize in private, and don’t personalize.
Make it clear that the problem is not due to some unfixable personality
flaw. Share stories when you’ve been criticized for something similar. (For
more tips, see Chapter Six, which details giving impromptu guidance.)
A leader I worked with at Apple described how he would help new
employees learn to take criticism in stride. He’d been at Apple for many
years and had a godlike reputation. After their first design review, he’d
show new employees two binders he kept in his office. One had ten sheets
of paper in it. The other had more than a thousand. “This is my ‘yes’ file,”
he explained, pointing to the slim binder. “The design ideas that got
approved.” Then, he’d pick up the fat binder and drop it for effect. “And
this is my ‘no’ file. Don’t let the criticism discourage you.”
Everyone must find their own way to criticize people without
discouraging them. Steve Jobs’s guidance style is certainly not for
everyone, but it’s worth understanding where he was coming from.
JOBS: I don’t mind being wrong. And I’ll admit that I’m wrong a lot. It doesn’t really matter to

me too much. What matters to me is that we do the right thing.

In my experience, people who are more concerned with getting to the
right answer than with being right make the best bosses. That’s because
they keep learning and improving, and they push the people who work for
them to do the same. A boss’s Radically Candid guidance helps the people
working for them do the best work of their lives.
Think of a simple example
“Your fly is down”

As the “your work is shit” example shows, it can be harder than you
might think to decide if you are being Radically Candid or not. One way to

solve a hard problem is to think of a simpler but similar one, recall how you
solved it, and then apply that technique to the harder problem. You can use
the same approach with emotional situations. When you’re faced with
telling a person something that will be extremely hard to hear, pretend
you’re just saying, “Your fly is down,” or “You have spinach in your teeth.”
These less-fraught scenarios can help you approach bigger problems more
straightforwardly.
To see how to apply the Radical Candor framework to giving guidance,
imagine a simple scenario: a colleague, Alex, has walked out of the
restroom, fly down, shirttail sticking out the front. What do you say?
Let’s say you decide to overcome the awkwardness and speak up. You
know Alex will be embarrassed when you point out the zipper, but if you
say nothing, ten more people will probably see Alex looking ridiculous. So
you pull Alex aside and quietly say, “Hey, Alex, your fly is down. I always
appreciate when people point it out to me when I’ve done the same thing. I
hope you don’t mind my mentioning it.” Your behavior is in the Radical
Candor quadrant—both caring personally and challenging directly.

If on the other hand you point out Alex’s fly loudly in front of other
people, trying to be funny by intentionally humiliating Alex, your behavior
is in the Obnoxious Aggression quadrant. However, that’s not the worst
possible scenario from Alex’s perspective, since you gave her the chance to
fix the problem.

If you know Alex is shy and will be embarrassed, maybe you decide to
say nothing and hope Alex notices the fly without your saying anything.
This behavior puts you in the Ruinous Empathy quadrant. In this scenario,
ten more people see Alex’s fly down with the ridiculous white shirt sticking
out of the front, and by the time Alex notices, it’s obvious her fly has been
down for a really long time. Now Alex is even more embarrassed than if
you’d said something immediately—and probably wonders why you didn’t
have the courtesy to mention it.
Finally, imagine you decide not to say anything because you’re thinking
about your own feelings and reputation. You’re silent not because you’re
concerned for Alex, but because you want to spare yourself. You care
deeply about being liked, and you’re worried Alex won’t like you if you say
something. You’re also worried if people overhear you saying something to
Alex, they will judge you. So you walk on by and say nothing. If you’re
really shameless, you might whisper to the next person who comes along to
go check out Alex’s fly. Congratulations—your behavior is in the worst
quadrant: Manipulative Insincerity!
It’s tempting to think that Radical Candor should be reserved only for
people you know well, like your friends and family. Tempting to think that
if you hung out in Ruinous Empathy or Manipulative Insincerity while you
got to know Alex, then one fine day it would be easy to say, “Hey, Alex, my
friend, your fly is down.” But the need for honest communication doesn’t
always wait until you’ve built a close personal relationship, and even a
near-stranger’s silence invites more awkwardness and mistrust than saying,
“Hey, your fly is down,” would have. Next time Alex sees you, there’s
going to be some awkwardness at the memory. Why didn’t you say
anything? The seeds of mistrust are sown in your reticence. That’s why Kim
Vorrath, a leader on the iOS team at Apple that built the software for the
iPhone, gave this simple advice about criticism: “Just say it!”
This framework is easy enough to keep in mind in the heat of the
moment, and it can help you see when you’re moving in the wrong
direction. Then next time you spot a metaphorical fly down and are tempted

not to say anything, imagine where that puts you on the framework:
Ruinous Empathy or Manipulative Insincerity? The little jolt might just
move you toward Radical Candor.
When confronted with somebody who is really upset, really angry, or
shutting down, most people retreat to Ruinous Empathy. A few hold their
ground but defend themselves against this onslaught of emotion by ceasing
to care, and therefore become obnoxiously aggressive. Even really wellintentioned people are sometimes tempted both to give ground and to quit
caring, retreating to Manipulative Insincerity.
If you imagine what you’re about to say and see that it’s going to land in
one of these bad quadrants, it will almost certainly move you toward
Radical Candor. You already know how to be Radically Candid because
you know how to care personally and to challenge directly.
From the moment you learned to speak, you started to challenge those
around you. Then you were told some version of “If you don’t have
anything nice to say, don’t say anything at all.” Well, now it’s your job to
say it. And if you are a boss or a person in a position of some authority, it’s
not just your job. It’s your moral obligation. Just say it!
You were also born with a capacity to connect, to care personally.
Somehow the training you got to “be professional” made you repress that.
Well, stop repressing your innate ability to care personally. Give a damn!

3.
UNDERSTAND WHAT MOTIVATES
EACH PERSON ON YOUR TEAM
Helping people take a step in the direction of
their dreams
RETHINKING AMBITION
LET’S RETURN TO the “care personally” dimension of Radical Candor. In

order to build a great team, you need to understand how each person’s job
fits into their life goals. You need to get to know each person who reports
directly to you, to have real, human relationships—relationships that change
as people change. When putting the right people in the right roles on your
team, you’ll also have to challenge people even more directly than you did
with guidance—and in a way that will impact not just their feelings but also
their income, their career growth, and their ability to get what they want out
of life. Building a team is hard.
A leader at Apple had a good way to think about different types of
ambition that people on her team had so that she could be thoughtful about
what roles to put people in. To keep a team cohesive, you need both rock
stars and superstars, she explained. Rock stars are solid as a rock. Think the
Rock of Gibraltar, not Bruce Springsteen. The rock stars love their work.

They have found their groove. They don’t want the next job if it will take
them away from their craft. Not all artists want to own a gallery; in fact,
most don’t. If you honor and reward the rock stars, they’ll become the
people you most rely on. If you promote them into roles they don’t want or
aren’t suited for, however, you’ll lose them—or, even worse, wind up firing
them. Superstars, on the other hand, need to be challenged and given new
opportunities to grow constantly.
In order to distinguish between the two, you must let go of your
judgments and your own ambitions, forget for a while what you need from
people, and focus on getting to know each person as a human being. For
many bosses, this means rethinking ambition.
If I say a person is “ambitious,” do you have a positive or a negative
reaction? Do you assume the person is hell-bent on personal gain and
slightly sinister, willing to trample others to achieve personal goals? Or do
you assume that the person is responsible and gets things done, a force for
positive change in the larger group?
If I say a person is “stable,” what is your “blink” reaction? That the
person is a snooze whom you’d rather not sit next to at a dinner party? Or
do you get a sense of relief and comfort and think that this is the sort of
person you’d like to have more of in your life? If I say a person is
“content,” what is your reaction? Do you admire that person? Would you
like to be more that way yourself? Or do you assume this is someone who is
going nowhere?
Now, let go of all these reactions and judgments. Look at the following
two columns of words and think about positive examples of people you’ve
worked with who would fall into each column. Think about teams you’ve
worked on that have needed some of each and what the right ratio would be.
Then think about times in your life when you’ve been in each of the
columns and why. Ideally, the choice would have been yours and not your
boss’s.

STEEP GROWTH TRAJECTORY

GRADUAL GROWTH TRAJECTORY

Change agent

Force for stability

Ambitious at work

Ambitious outside of work or simply content in life

Want new opportunities

Happy in the current role

“Superstar”

“Rock Star”

Shortly after I joined Google, Larry Page told me about a time when
he’d had a boss who was suspicious of ambition. While on a summer
internship, Larry had been given an assignment that would have taken him a
couple of days if he’d been given the freedom to do it his way. He
explained the advantages of his approach to the boss, but the boss would
have none of it: he insisted that Larry do it “the way they’d always done it.”
Instead of two days, Larry was forced to spend all summer working on the
project. The wasted time and effort were pure torture for him. As most of us
have, Larry discovered that a boss who held him back could make life
miserable. “Three months of my life wasted and gone forever. I never want
anyone at Google to have a boss like that. Ever,” Larry told me once, and I
saw he meant it by the way he led at Google. Larry went to great lengths to
make sure bosses couldn’t squash their employees’ ideas and ambitions. I
loved that about Google.
Now here’s a story about a boss on a steep growth trajectory—me—who
insisted that everybody share my ambitions, and how my experiences at
Apple set me straight.
Unfortunately, for too long I believed that pushing everybody to grow
super-fast was simply “best practice” for building a high-performing team. I
was always looking for the best, the brightest, the brashest, and the most
ambitious. For the first twenty years of my career, it never occurred to me
that some people did not want the next, bigger job. When I designed
Managing at Apple, an early iteration of the class encouraged managers to
focus the lion’s share of attention and resources on the most ambitious
people on their teams, often to the detriment of people doing equally good

work and happy to keep doing it—the backbone of a strong team. And,
ironically, the kind of person I had become at that stage in my career.
Scott Forstall, who built the iOS team and worked directly for Steve
Jobs, helped me understand that this approach was profoundly out of step
with Apple’s ethos—and, moreover, that it didn’t create the optimal team.
We were discussing the performance-potential matrix that so many
companies use for succession planning or “talent management.” McKinsey
& Company originally developed it to help General Electric decide which
businesses to invest in, and HR departments at thousands of organizations
have adapted it for talent management.1 This matrix asks managers to assess
both the performance and the potential of all employees and then put them
into one of nine boxes—“high performance/high potential” being the best
and “low performance/low potential” being the worst.
“‘Potential’ doesn’t seem like the right word,” I said. “I don’t think
there is any such thing as a low-potential human being.” There was an
idealistic side to my hard-charging approach to team-building.
“Words matter,” Scott said. “Let’s wrestle with it.”
We debated it for some time. One problem with the “potential” category
was that it didn’t seem to allow for a positive evaluation of people who
were great at what they did and wanted to keep doing it. Scott needed to
keep people like that happy and productive, and he expected all the
managers in his organization to do the same.
Scott proposed using the word “growth” instead of “potential,” to help
managers think about what opportunities to give to which people on their
teams. Changing one word made a world of difference. Instead of asking an
implicitly judgmental question like, “Is this a person with high or low
potential?” we encouraged managers to ask themselves questions like,
“What growth trajectory does each person on my team want to be on right
now?” or “Have I given everybody opportunities that are in line with what
they really want?” or “What growth trajectory do my direct reports believe
they are on? Do I agree? And if I don’t, why don’t I?” Sometimes people
really want to grow and are capable of contributing more than they have

been allowed to; at other times, they simply want more money or
recognition but don’t really want to change the way they work or contribute
any more than they do already. As the boss, you’re the one who’s going to
have to know your direct reports well enough to make these distinctions and
then have some Radically Candid conversations when you see things
differently.
This set of questions around growth trajectory can help you discover
what motivates each person much better than a set of questions around
“potential” or “talent” could. And the insights it produces will help you
avoid burning out the rock stars and boring the superstars. These questions
will help remind you that trajectories change and that you shouldn’t put
permanent labels on people. They will help you build stable teams that
achieve astounding results.
Scott was right. Words matter.

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
It’s getting better all the time
traditional “talent management” mind-set to one of
“growth management” will help you make sure everyone on your team is
moving in the direction of their dreams, ensuring that your team
collectively improves over time. Creativity flourishes, efficiency improves,
people enjoy working together.
You can use this “growth management” framework to clarify your
thinking about how to manage the two different types of high performers—
those on a steep growth trajectory and those on a more gradual growth
trajectory—differently. It will remind you to help people conduct their
careers in the way they desire, not in the way you think they should want to.
You can also use it to remember to push everyone on a team toward
excellent performance, as well as to figure out whom to hire, whom to fire,
and when a person’s poor performance might just be the boss’s (your) fault.
SHIFTING FROM A

The most important thing you can do for your team collectively is to
understand what growth trajectory each person wants to be on at a given
time and whether that matches the needs and opportunities of the team. To
do that, you are going to have to get to know each of your direct reports at a
personal level. It’s also going to require you to have some of the hardest
conversations you’ll ever have. Sometimes, you’ll even have to fire people.
The axes of this framework are past performance and future growth
trajectories. The assessment of past performance on the horizontal axis of
this framework does go from “bad” to “good,” but not the vertical axis. It’s
just as good to be in the bottom-right quadrant as in the upper-right. Rock
stars are just as important to a team’s performance as superstars. Stability is
just as important as growth. The right mix of each will change over time,
but you’ll always need some of each.
When assessing a person’s past performance, it’s useful to consider both
their results and more intangible things like “teamwork.” The expected
results for a given quarter or year are ideally set by the employee; they
should be as objective and as measurable as possible. The intangibles are
usually impossible to measure but not too hard to describe, and so
expectations should be clear here as well. Performance is not a permanent
label. No person is always an “excellent performer.” They just performed
excellently last quarter.

The past is much easier to understand than the future. The future is best
described by each person’s current “growth trajectory.” Before considering
how to manage each type of employee to ensure your team is cohesive, it’s
worth taking a little more time to understand exactly what I mean by
“growth trajectory,” and why it matters so much.

UNDERSTANDING WHAT MATTERS AND WHY
at growth management, you need to find out what
motivates each person on your team. You also need to learn what each
person’s long-term ambitions are, and understand how their current
circumstances fit into their motivations and their life goals. Only when you
get to know your direct reports well enough to know why they care about
their work, what they hope to get out of their careers, and where they are in
the present moment in time can you put the right people in the right roles
and assign the right projects to the right people. (For a specific technique,
see “Career Conversations,” Chapter Seven.)
“Steep growth” is generally characterized by rapid change—learning
new skills or deepening existing ones quickly. It’s not about becoming a
manager—plenty of individual contributors remain on a steep growth
trajectory their entire careers, and plenty of managers are on a gradual
growth trajectory. Nor should steep growth be thought of as narrowly as
“promotion.” It’s about having an increased impact over time.
Gradual growth is characterized by stability. People on a gradual growth
trajectory, who perform well, have generally mastered their work and are
making incremental rather than sudden, dramatic improvements. Some
roles may be better suited to a rock star because they require steadiness,
accumulated knowledge, and an attention to detail that someone in a
superstar phase might not have the focus or patience for.
People in a superstar phase are bad at rock star roles, and people in a
rock star phase will hate a superstar role. The team of diamond cutters I
managed in Russia—the guys I wrote about in chapter one who taught me
TO BE SUCCESSFUL

to “care personally”—were master craftsmen, as skilled as anyone in the
world. They were rock stars; they had no desire for my boss’s job. My boss,
Maurice Tempelsman, on the other hand, told a story about himself when he
was a younger, extremely ambitious, restless man. As he was building his
company, he decided to try his hand at diamond cutting. One day he got on
the phone, started negotiating a big deal, got distracted, and ground a
million-dollar diamond away to dust. True story. That’s why you don’t want
a person on a steep-growth trajectory in a gradual-growth-trajectory job.
Most people shift between a steep growth trajectory and a gradual
growth trajectory in different phases of their lives and careers, so it’s
important not to put a permanent label on people. For example, there were
two aspiring Olympic athletes on my team at Google. Both women did
great work, but right out of college, when they were at their athletic prime,
they poured as much energy into training as into work. They were on a
gradual growth trajectory at work, a steep growth trajectory in sports. Five
years later, both pivoted, pouring all that drive and energy into their careers
rather than into sports. Their career trajectories rocketed.
Of course, most of us aren’t aspiring Olympic athletes. I certainly am
not. There are lots of reasons why people shift between a gradual and a
steep growth trajectory, and circumstances that spur one person to do one
thing spur another person to do the opposite. Take having a child.
Sometimes the financial burden of parenthood spurs ambition; sometimes
the desire to get home in time to play with young children spurs a desire for
more predictability. Sometimes an ill relative requires a person to get on a
more gradual growth trajectory but, when the illness passes, ambition kicks
back in. Generally, an ambition or a commitment outside of work enhances
a person’s value to the team—that means you get, say, a great artist as your
graphic designer, as long as you don’t insist that the artist get on the fast
track at work.

THE PROBLEM WITH “PASSION”

IT’S A BASIC axiom that people do better work when they find that work

meaningful. I don’t disagree with this basic premise. However, bosses who
take this to mean that it is their job to provide purpose tend to overstep.
Insisting that people have passion for their job can place unnecessary
pressure on both boss and employee. I struggled with this at Google, where
we were hiring people right out of college to do dull customer-support
work. I tried convincing them that we were “funding creativity a nickel at a
time.” One young woman who’d studied philosophy in college, called BS
immediately. “Look, the job is a little boring,” she said. “Let’s just admit
that. It’s OK. Plutarch laid bricks. Spinoza ground lenses. Tedium is part of
life.” I loved her approach to finding meaning, but it was unique to her. A
slogan like “Spinoza ground lenses” would not have been inspiring for the
broader team.
In a burst of Radical Candor, Financial Times writer Lucy Kellaway
explained why she chose to work for the companies she did: “I went for
JPMorgan and later for the FT because they were the only companies
offering me a job. It seemed a great reason to pick them then. It is still a
great reason today.”2
There’s nothing wrong with working hard to earn a paycheck that
supports the life you want to lead. That has plenty of meaning. A wise man
once told me, “Only about five percent of people have a real vocation in
life, and they confuse the hell out of the rest of us.” Trying to describe a job
in lofty, save-the-world terms is often going to make you look like the
ridiculous Hooli CEO Gavin Belson from the show Silicon Valley. Which
brings us back to the main point of this chapter: your job is not to provide
purpose but instead to get to know each of your direct reports well enough
to understand how each one derives meaning from their work.
A story about Christopher Wren, the architect responsible for rebuilding
St. Paul’s Cathedral after the Great Fire of London, explains what I mean.
Wren was walking the length of the partially rebuilt cathedral when he
asked three bricklayers what they were doing. The first bricklayer
responded, “I’m working.” The second said, “I’m building a wall.” The

third paused, looked up, and then said, “I’m building a cathedral to the
Almighty.”
Many people use this story to celebrate the person who has a sense of
vision and can imagine his individual efforts as part of a grand collective
enterprise. In current-day Silicon Valley, inspirational slogans run more
along the lines of “putting a ding in the universe,” as Steve Jobs put it. But
motivations are highly personal. Although I admire Jobs, it seems to me
that the universe, or at least our world, is plenty dinged up already. So, I
don’t find his call to put a “ding in the universe” inspirational, though
others do. Sure, it’s a boss’s job to put the team’s work in context, and if
you share why the work gives you meaning, that can help others find their
own inspiration. But remember, it’s not all about you.
For me, the most instructive part of Wren’s story is that he didn’t come
up with a sense of purpose himself and pound it into everyone’s head. Each
bricklayer cared about something different, even though all three were
working on the same thing. Wren’s role was to listen, to recognize the
significance of what he heard, and to create working conditions that
allowed everybody to find meaning in their own way.

EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE
Keep your top performers top of mind
BEFORE DELVING INTO the differences between how to manage rock stars or

superstars, it’s useful to focus on what both need from you. Your role is to
focus on them and to make sure they are getting everything they need to
continue doing great work.

Be a partner, not an absentee manager or a micromanager
One of the most common mistakes bosses make is to ignore the people
who are doing the best work because “they don’t need me” or “I don’t want
to micromanage.” Ignoring somebody is a terrible way to build a
relationship.
Some management bloviators will advise you simply to hire the right
people and then leave them alone. Dick Costolo, Twitter’s CEO from 2010–
2015, explained succinctly how crazy this advice is. “That’s like saying, to
have a good marriage, marry the right person and then avoid spending any
time with them. Ridiculous, right?” he exclaimed. “Imagine if I went home
and told my wife, ‘I don’t want to micromanage you, so I’m not going to
spend any time with you or the kids this year.’”
The “choose and ignore” strategy is just as crazy for management as it is
for marriage. If you don’t take the time to get to know the people who get
the best results, you can’t understand how they want and need to be
growing in their jobs at that particular moment in their lives. You’ll assign
the wrong tasks to the wrong people. You’ll promote the wrong people.
Also, if you ignore your top performers, you won’t give them the guidance
they need. Every minute you spend with somebody who does great work
pays off in the team’s results much more than time spent with somebody
who’s failing. Ignore these people and you won’t, in short, be managing.

You don’t want to be an absentee manager any more than you want to
be a micromanager. Instead, you want to be a partner—that is, you must
take the time to help the people doing the best work overcome obstacles and
make their good work even better. This is time-consuming because it
requires that you know enough about the details of the person’s work to
understand the nuances. It often requires you to help do the work, rather
than just advising. It requires that you ask a lot of questions and challenge
people—that you roll up your own sleeves.
Managers often devote more time to those who are struggling than to
those who are succeeding. But that’s not fair to those who are succeeding—
nor is it good for the team as a whole. Moving from great to stunningly
great is more inspiring for everyone than moving from bad to mediocre.
And seeing what truly exceptional performance looks like will help those
who are failing to see more clearly what’s expected of them.

EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE/GRADUAL GROWTH
TRAJECTORY
Recognize, reward, but don’t promote
FOR MOST OF my career, I was all about finding and rewarding people who

were breaking the sound barrier of achievement. Then one day, in 2008, I
realized I was the one now on a gradual growth trajectory at work. A
Twitter board member came to ask me if I wanted to interview to be the
company’s new CEO. That was the kind of role I would have given my left
arm to have had a couple of years earlier. But at that moment in my life, I
was interested in a very different kind of growth. I was forty years old,
pregnant with twins, and it was a high-risk pregnancy. When I consulted my
doctor about this stressful new opportunity, she advised me, “Just ask
yourself which is more important: this job or the hearts and lungs of your
children?”

Enough said. What mattered most to me at that moment was not growth
at Twitter or my career growth at Google, but the tiny creatures growing
inside of me. And with its delicious healthy food at every turn and the
maternal massage therapist one floor up from my office and a lap pool for
the swims my doctor recommended, Google was still the perfect place for a
high-risk pregnancy. I didn’t need to quit, but I did I need to stay on a more
gradual growth trajectory at work. I was able to continue to lead the
AdSense, DoubleClick, and YouTube teams, but I was not able to push for
the next job. And so I stayed where I was, carried the twins to term, and
gave birth to two healthy babies. For the rest of my life, I’ll be grateful to
Google for affording me that opportunity.
I am not saying that other pregnant women can’t be fully committed
CEOs—many have proven it’s possible. I’m just saying I couldn’t. It wasn’t
till the twins turned seven that I felt I had the capacity to get back on a steep
growth trajectory and start a company. I am also not saying that parents
(men have children, too) of toddlers can’t found a company or be on a
super-steep growth trajectory. I’m not even saying I couldn’t. I’m just
saying that I didn’t want to. I am also not saying that having children is the
most common reason for people to get on a more gradual growth trajectory.
Your people might not look at all like me: they might look more like
Einstein in the patent office or T. S. Eliot in the bank.

What I am saying is we all have periods in our lives when our
professional growth speeds up or slows down. Recreation is essential for
creation. Just as there is nothing inherently ignoble about ambition, there is
no shame in being in the same job for many years. We all need a bit of both
growth and stability in our lives and on our teams. Unfortunately, even
though I was living that reality, I still didn’t fully respect it. Instead of
expanding my viewpoint after having my children, I began looking down
on myself the way I had looked down on others earlier in my career. “That
which does not grow, rots,” said Catherine the Great. Rather than
recognizing the whole person—my whole person, who was growing and
changing every day, along with my twins—I was deeply afraid I’d begun to
rot.
In other words, I still believed that pushing everybody to grow was best
practice for building a team. As I described above, when I left Google and
went to Apple, both the company in general and Scott Forstall in particular
helped clarify my thinking. But I still didn’t fully accept it in my heart of
hearts. It was on a day I stayed home from work with my toddler son that I
finally learned the lesson deep in my gut. He had a 104-degree fever and
was too listless to do anything other than watch The Lorax, the film
adaptation of the Dr. Seuss book. The Lorax’s advice to the Onceler in the
“biggering” song finally brought the lesson home:
I’m figuring on biggering!
But that biggering’s just triggering more biggering!

As my son’s fever broke, I realized that not only was my blind
obsession with growth misaligned with my personal humanity, it wasn’t
even the best way to build a great team. When I looked back over my
career, I thought with shame about the considerable number of people I’d
undervalued or dismissed. This moment radically altered my personal
approach to the rest of my career.

In an almost poetic twist of fate, it was Dick Costolo, the CEO who took
Twitter public, who gave me the opportunity that allowed me to write this
book and spend more time with my toddlers. He asked me to help him
design a class, Managing at Twitter. I was happy to do so, and after we’d
worked together on it, he asked me if I wanted to interview for a big
operating role on his team. As I went through the interview process, it
became clear to both of us that I didn’t have the energy at that time in my
life for the role. He asked me if I’d be interested in becoming his coach
instead: a cushy one-hour-every-other-week gig. Dick’s ability to help
identify the perfect role for me at that time in my life has made an
enormous difference in my career. It not only allowed me to be on a gradual
growth trajectory at work when I wanted to write and be with my kids, it
also set me up perfectly for when I was ready to shift gears again.
What’s the best way to manage rock stars, the people whom you can
count on to deliver great results year after year? You need to recognize them
to keep them happy. For too many bosses, “recognition” means
“promotion.” But in most cases, this is a big mistake. Promotion often puts
these people in roles they are not as well-suited for or don’t want. The key
is to recognize their contribution in other ways. It may be a bonus or a raise.
Or, if they like public speaking, get them to present at your all-hands
meetings or other big events. If they like teaching, get them to help new
people learn their roles faster. Or if they are shy, make sure that you and
others on the team thank them privately for the work they do. Consider,
carefully, tenure awards. If your organization gives performance ratings
and/or bonuses, make sure they are fair to the rock stars.
Fair performance ratings
In some companies, rock stars don’t get the performance review they
deserve because all the top ratings are reserved for people who are in line to
get promoted. A lot of companies ration the number of top ratings.
Avoiding “grade inflation” is a good idea. However, an unintended

consequence is often that rock stars get lower ratings than they should. In
fact, all of your top performers should get top ratings. When performance
ratings have an impact on compensation, this is especially important.
If one person is doing much better work than others on the team, it
seems obvious they should get a better rating and a higher bonus. But when
ratings are primarily used to justify future promotions, rather than to
recognize past performance, this doesn’t happen.
Recognition
In addition to top ratings, a great way to recognize people in a rock star
phase is to designate them as “gurus,” or “go-to” experts. Often this means
putting them in charge of teaching newer team members, if they show the
aptitude for it. Bosses can be reluctant to use a top performer this way,
wanting them to do the job rather than to teach others. However, this
attitude prevents an organization from getting as much leverage out of
experts as they otherwise would.
In World War II, the U.S. Air Force took their very best pilots from the
front lines and sent them home to train new pilots. Over time this strategy
dramatically improved the quality and effectiveness of the U.S. Air Force.
The Germans lost their air superiority because they flew all their aces until
they were shot down; none of them trained new recruits. By 1944 new
German pilots had clocked only about half of the three hundred hours an
Allied pilot would have flown in training.
Too many companies hire people for training whom they would never
hire to do the actual job. Or, worse, rather than fire people who are not
performing well in a particular role, they send them off to teach others how
to do it. This sounds absurd, but I’ve seen that very thing happen at some
great companies. This kind of blind-leading-the-blind practice gives
training a bad name. Generally, people who are great at a job enjoy teaching
it to others; giving them this role can not only improve the performance of
the whole team but also give the rock stars a different sort of recognition.

Of course, some people hate teaching and are terrible at it: this role
should be an honor, not a requirement. And there are times when being the
go-to expert might drive a person off the team because the person hates
being interrupted with questions all day long. So be sensitive to that. But if
a person enjoys teaching and answering questions, by all means encourage
and reward them for doing it.
Of all the companies I know well, Apple did the best job of creating a
great environment for people in a rock star phase. The company’s
organizational design optimized for deep functional expertise. There were
no “general managers.” There was no iPhone division. Instead, there were
operating system engineers, camera experts, audiophiles, and glass gurus
who came together around the iPhone. There were always people around
who knew some functional aspect of the product more deeply than anyone
else, and they were revered for it.
I was struck by the deference given to people who had been in a
particular role for years at Apple. At Google and many other Silicon Valley
companies, being in the same role for too long was a badge of shame. Some
companies even have a so-called “up or out” policy and fire these people.
Steve Jobs, on the other hand, paid close attention to retention and talked
warmly about people who’d been with Apple for a long time.
This focus on tenure at Apple was confusing to me at first, because I
tended to think of tenure rewards as something that happened at traditional
companies or in academia, not at fast-growing tech companies. I realized,
though, that honoring tenure was an important alternative to promotions for
people who’d been doing the same job for years. Apple gave framed awards
to people at the five-, ten-, fifteen-, and twenty-year marks. Then Jony Ive,
Apple’s chief design officer, designed a leaded glass plaque, vapor-honed
for an especially beautiful finish, with Apple’s logo etched into it. Everyone
who’d been at the company for more than ten years got one. Plenty of
bloggers have mocked this award, but there are several things that made it
work at Apple. It was reflective of the company’s design aesthetic, so it
wasn’t just a random gold watch. Leaders at the company invested

personally in it. These awards were presented by leaders who knew the
work of the recipient well. And the award was presented at a team meeting
or other venue that would give the person public recognition. For most
people who received it, the award had meaning and personal significance.
Respect
Before T. S. Eliot was able to make a living as a publisher, he was a
clerk at Lloyd’s Bank. Eliot’s boss once said, patronizingly, that if Eliot
played his cards right, he might even be lucky enough to become a branch
manager. Of course, Eliot was focused on writing poetry that would
eventually win him a Nobel Prize, not on becoming a branch manager. He
needed a steady income and a steady job so that he could go home in the
evenings and write. If Eliot’s boss had wanted to retain him, he should have
figured out how to let him leave an hour earlier each day, not encouraged
him to put in the extra effort that a promotion would likely entail.
Life is so much better when people are great at their work and love it.
The idea of climbing a corporate ladder is not inspiring to plenty of people.
And yet those on a gradual growth trajectory are often referred to
pejoratively as “B-players,” or as having “capped out.”
To manage these people well, it’s obviously important to reject these
derogatory characterizations. Those who find work they can continue to
love for five or ten or thirty years, even if it doesn’t lead to some sort of
advancement, are damn lucky. And their teams and their bosses are lucky to
have them. Kick-ass bosses never judge people doing great work as having
“capped out.” Instead, they treat them with the honor that they are due and
retain the individuals who will keep their team stable, cohesive, and
productive.
The dangers of promotion obsession
Let’s look at what happens when bosses promote when they shouldn’t.
One result is described hilariously in Laurence J. Peter’s book The Peter

Principle. The Peter Principle results in people getting promoted beyond
their level of competence—an unhappy situation for everyone, especially
the person who’s been promoted.
Another version of the bad promotion occurs when people are
competent for the next job but have no desire to do it at that moment in
their lives. I once had a colleague who’d planned carefully so that when he
had his first baby he was in a job that he’d mastered and thus could get
home to be with his newborn. His boss, however, had different plans for
him: a promotion. When informed of his promotion, the man declined it.
When told it wasn’t optional, he quit. What a waste.
Don’t do this to your rock stars!
* * *
PART OF BUILDING a cohesive team is to create a culture that recognizes and

rewards the rock stars. I’m afraid for most of my career I treated them like
second-class citizens. I’m grateful that my experiences at Apple set me
straight.

EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE/ STEEP GROWTH
TRAJECTORY
Keep superstars challenged
WHEN I THINK of people who are in superstar mode, I think of Catharine

Burhenne and David Sanderson.
I first met Catharine when she interviewed for a job babysitting our twin
infants. The twins were immediately comfortable with Catharine, and I
hired her on the spot. However, what she really wanted was not a
babysitting gig, but a job at Google. I loved having Catharine taking care of
our children, but I knew my job was to encourage her to pursue her dreams,
not to try to keep her in her current role. I helped her get an interview, and

she got a job there; then Facebook hired her away from Google, and then
Twitter hired her away from Facebook.

When I first met David, he, too, was babysitting my twins. He was
spending the summer in Silicon Valley to be with Catharine, whom he was
dating, and trying to figure out what to do with his life. When I asked him
what he loved to do, he talked about music. I learned from Catharine—he
was too modest to tell me—that he didn’t just love music, he was the toprated pianist in Canada in his age bracket. I asked him if he wanted to be a
professional musician, and he said no, because the financial sacrifices he’d
have to make were just too great. I wished I could tell him to follow his
passion, but I was sympathetic—I love writing novels but would never try
to support my family that way.
Meanwhile our sprinkler system was going haywire. I certainly had no
expectation that David would fix the irrigation pipes as well as take care of
the children; I myself often could not find time to take a shower when I was
watching them on the weekends. But David went to the hardware store after
work one night and figured out how to fix the whole thing the next day
while the twins were napping. I was beginning to get the picture: David
noticed when things were broken and rolled up his sleeves to fix them, even
if they weren’t in his job description. I asked him what job he’d had that he
enjoyed. He’d loved all his jobs. When he worked at a shop in Vancouver,

he not only became the top salesperson but he improved the shop’s
inventory system, decreasing wait time; improved customer satisfaction;
and increased sales for all the salespeople, not just himself. Clearly David
would always push for excellence in his work, no matter what job he had.
He would not just do more than was required; he’d do things you didn’t
even think were possible. He exemplified the advice from Ecclesiastes:
“Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.”
I also knew that as much as I loved having David around, it was my job
to help him keep growing. I made introductions for him, edited his résumé,
and did a practice interview with him. He got himself a job at Facebook
and, to no one’s surprise, set the company record for the most promotions
the fastest.
Catharine and David went on to live the Silicon Valley dream. They’ve
started a company, ReelGood, that makes it much faster and easier to figure
out what movie or TV show to watch.
Here’s some advice about what to do when you are lucky enough to
have people like Catharine and David on your team:
Keep them challenged (and figure out who’ll replace them when they
move on)
The best way to keep superstars happy is to challenge them and make
sure they are constantly learning. Give them new opportunities, even when
it is sometimes more work than seems feasible for one person to do. Figure
out what the next job for them will be. Build an intellectual partnership with
them. Find them mentors from outside your team or organization—people
who have even more to offer than you do. But make sure you don’t get too
dependent on them; ask them to teach others on the team to do their job,
because they won’t stay in their existing role for long. I often thought of
these people as shooting stars—my team and I were lucky to have them in
our orbit for a little while, but trying to hold them there was futile.
Don’t squash them or block them

It’s vital not to “squash” these people. Recognize that you’ll probably be
working for them one day, and celebrate that fact. When I first hired Jared
Smith to be a product manager at Juice, I quickly realized that I’d be lucky
if he one day returned the favor. Sure enough, a decade later he hired me as
an executive coach and board member at Qualtrics, the company he
cofounded with his brother. I’m working not just for Jared but for his whole
family.
Of all the companies I’ve worked for, Google did the best job of putting
safeguards in place so that managers couldn’t curb the ambitions of their
direct reports. This was directly tied to the company’s efforts to limit the
power of managers to quash rather than accelerate the careers of people on
a steep growth trajectory. For example, consider the promotion process that
Shona Brown, SVP of Business Operations, designed at Google. Bosses at
Google can’t simply promote people on their teams at their own discretion.
In engineering, managers can encourage or discourage a person from
pursuing another job, and they can lobby for the person or not, but people
nominate themselves for promotion, and a committee makes the decision.
Once a “promotion packet” consisting of a list of accomplishments and
recommendations has been assembled, a committee reads it and decides if
the promotion should go through. The manager is not on that committee.
The manager can appeal a decision, but the manager is not the decider. This
prevents managers from curbing the ambition of their direct reports or from
offering promotions to reward personal loyalty rather than great work.
Google also makes it pretty easy for people to seek new opportunities
by transferring from one team to another team. No boss can “block” such a
transfer. I once took a person onto my team who had convinced me that he
was great but that his boss had it out for him—despite the fact that he had
received terrible ratings. Nobody tried to stop this from happening. And that
was a good thing because on our team, this person thrived. Allowing
transfers is important because it prevents bosses from blackballing
employees who want to move on, and allows for the fact that sometimes
two people just don’t work that well together.

Google didn’t get everything right, though. There was a crazy-strict rule
in Product Management that you had to have a computer science degree to
join the team. Many people wanted to transfer to Product because they had
ideas they wanted to pursue, but they were prevented because they didn’t
have the right degree. One was Biz Stone who, stymied by the rule, left
Google to cofound Twitter. Another was Ben Silbermann, who, similarly
blocked, left Google to found Pinterest. Kevin Systrom also left Google to
cofound Instagram when he couldn’t join the PM team because of his
college degree.
Not every superstar wants to manage
Lack of interest in managing is not the same thing as being on a gradual
growth trajectory, just as interest in managing is not the same thing as being
on a steep growth trajectory. Management and growth should not be
conflated.
Imagine if Albert Einstein had been told, just as he was developing his
theory of relativity, that he needed to stop spending so much time alone
with his work and instead take on management responsibilities for a team of
people. The result would have been a frustrated Einstein, a demoralized and
poorly managed team, and a great loss to humanity’s understanding of the
universe.
Yet a version of this happens all the time. The careers of many great
engineers and salespeople have foundered when they are promoted to
manager. Why does this happen? Because there’s no other role to promote
them to that acknowledges the kind of growth trajectory they want to be on.
This points to another problem with the language used in the traditional
performance-potential matrix. Often the matrix is not just analyzing
“potential” but “leadership potential.” The unintended consequence of this
is that whole armies of people systematically cap the careers of others who
are on a steep growth trajectory but who don’t want to become managers.
This in turn systematically caps the rewards that can be given to people who

are more interested in deepening their expertise and advancing human
knowledge rather than being a boss. Don’t get me wrong—I believe great
management is important. But it’s certainly not the only path to major
impact.
Google’s engineering teams solved this problem by creating an
“individual contributor” career path that is more prestigious than the
manager path and sidesteps management entirely. This has been great for
the growth of these engineers; it’s also good for the people whom they
would otherwise have been managing. When people become bosses just to
“get ahead” rather than because they want to do what bosses do, they
perform, at best, a perfunctory job and often become bosses from hell.
When management is the only path to higher compensation, the quality
of management suffers, and the lives of the people who work for these
reluctant managers become miserable.

MANAGING THE MIDDLE
Raise the bar—there’s no such thing as a B-player
AS I SAID above, I do not believe there is any such thing as a “B-player” or a

mediocre human being. Everyone can be excellent at something. That’s
very different from saying anyone can be good at anything—definitely not
true. And this brings me to the people who just aren’t that good at a job, or
are treading water.
Sadly, lots of people never find work they are truly excellent at because
they stay in the wrong job so long that any change would require a step or
two backward. They may have come to depend on the prestige and money
of the current position, and feel pressure from family to keep it. Bosses
keep this kind of employee on for several reasons: they’re not sure they can
find someone better; it takes time and effort to train new people; and they
like the person and feel it would be unfair to encourage them to find a job
they are better suited for.

This lack of courage and energy leads to a tremendous loss of human
potential—to lives of quiet desperation. Assuming that people who are not
thriving are therefore “mediocre” and can’t do any better is both unjust and
unkind. Allowing them to continue down that path may be the worst case of
Ruinous Empathy that managers regularly display and a great source of
wasted possibility. Of course, treating these people fairly requires that you
know them well enough to understand why they aren’t thriving; if they are
simply going through a rough period, it’s better to give them the time and
space to recover than to push for more than they have to give just then.

One of the least popular things I did with my teams at Google was to
insist that people who had not done exceptional work for more than two
years be given an opportunity to work on a project that would let them
shine. If their work still continued to be mediocre, we began encouraging
these people to look for jobs elsewhere.
This policy was hard to enforce and created a lot of stress. It was the
managers who minded it the most, because it forced them to have a lot of
challenging conversations and to push those who reported to them really
hard. Of course, it was also difficult for people who’d been doing OK for a
couple of years to get pushed out of their comfort zone. But I don’t believe
that it created as much misery for them as being labeled permanently
“mediocre” would have.

I did it because I believed that everyone can be exceptional somewhere
and that it was my job to help them find that role. I also believed that we
should strive to have 100 percent of the team doing exceptional work. If
somebody hadn’t proven in the course of two years that they could do
exceptional work, they almost certainly would never get there. It was time
to help them find a job where they could shine and time for us to start
looking to replace them with somebody who could shine on our team. For
some people, that meant leaving Google to do something more in line with
their dreams—like becoming a teacher or landscape architect, or opening a
tea shop. In other cases, people went on to do similar work but at smaller
companies where they could be more of a jack-of-all-trades. Sometimes,
people just needed to be thrown out of the nest to spread their wings. In all
cases, the people wound up much happier, even though making a change
was hard.
In many ways, your job as the boss is to set and uphold a quality bar.
That can feel harsh in the short term, but in the long run the only thing that
is meaner is lowering the bar. Don’t get sucked into Ruinous Empathy when
managing people who are doing OK but not great! Everybody can excel
somewhere. And to build a great team that achieves exceptional results,
everybody needs to be doing great work. Accepting mediocrity isn’t good
for anybody.

POOR PERFORMANCE/ NEGATIVE GROWTH TRAJECTORY
Part ways
performing poorly and, having received clear
communication about the nature of the problem, is showing no signs of
improvement, you must fire that person. How you do it goes a long way to
defining your long-term success as a boss, because it sends a clear signal to
everyone on your team whether or not you truly care about people for more
than what they can do for you on the job.
WHEN

SOMEBODY

IS

It goes without saying that getting fired is one of the most soulchallenging things that can happen to a person. Its effects are bad enough
for the people themselves, and they ripple out to their families in the form
of financial difficulties, loss of medical benefits, marriage troubles, and,
worst of all, the strain of seeing someone you love suffer.
The knowledge that you are about to inflict some measure of suffering
on someone you may care a lot about obviously makes actually doing it
very hard. I once talked to a crazy-successful New Yorker who seemed far
more brash than compassionate about firing people. He told me that on
mornings when he was going to fire somebody, he always woke up in a cold
sweat. I hadn’t known that anything could make him sweat! If he felt bad,
no wonder I did, and no wonder you do, too. So we avoid it at all costs—
again, with negative consequences for everyone. So you need to approach
firing thoughtfully and deliberately.

How do you know when it’s time to fire somebody?
Let’s say that someone on your team, “Peggy,” is terrible at her job, not
getting any better, or even getting worse. Is it time to fire her? There’s no
absolute answer to that question, but here are three questions to consider:
have you given her Radically Candid guidance, do you understand the

impact of Peggy’s performance on her colleagues, and have you sought
advice from others?
Have you given Radically Candid guidance? Have you demonstrated to
Peggy that you care personally about her work and her life, and have you
been crystal clear when you have challenged her to improve? Has your
praise been substantive and specific about what she has done right, rather
than simply a salve to her ego? Have you been humble as well as direct in
your criticism, offering to help her find solutions rather than attacking her
as a person? And have you done these things on multiple occasions over the
course of time? If the answer is yes and you have not seen improvement, or
have seen only flickers of improvement, it’s time. Remember—the
definition of insanity is continuing to do the same thing and expecting
different results.
How is this person’s poor performance affecting the rest of the team?
Peggy’s shortcomings aren’t only your problem. As a manager, it’s your job
to make sure you understand everyone else’s perspective, as well, and how
her poor performance affects other members of the team. Generally, by the
time one of your direct report’s poor performance has come to your
attention, it’s been driving their peers nuts for a long time.
Have you sought out a second opinion, spoken to someone whom you
trust and with whom you can talk the problem through? Sometimes you
may think you’ve been clear when you haven’t been. Getting an outside
perspective can help you make sure you’re being fair. Also, if you don’t
have experience firing somebody, talk to somebody who does. In today’s
world, most companies have strict guidelines that must be followed when
someone is being fired, and there are lots of legal “gotcha”s that can
consume tons of time down the road if you’re not careful.
Common lies managers tell themselves to avoid firing somebody who
needs to be fired

Managers almost always wait too long to fire people. Being too cautious
may be preferable to being too hasty, but I’d say that most managers wait
far too long to do it because they have fooled themselves into believing that
it’s unnecessary. Below are four common “lies” managers tell themselves to
avoid firing somebody:
1. It will get better. But of course it won’t get better all by itself. So stop and ask yourself:
how, exactly, will it get better? What are you going to do differently? What will the person
in question do differently? How might circumstances change? Even if things have gotten a
little better, have they improved enough? If you don’t have a pretty precise answer to those
questions, it probably won’t get better.
2. Somebody is better than nobody. Another common reason why bosses are reluctant to fire a
poor performer is that they don’t want a “hole” on the team. If you fire “Jeffrey,” who will
do the work he was doing? How long will it take you to find a replacement? The fact is that
poor performers often create as much extra work for others as they accomplish themselves,
because they leave parts of their job undone or do other parts sloppily or behave
unprofessionally in ways that others must compensate for. Steve Jobs put it succinctly, if
harshly, when he said, “It’s better to have a hole than an asshole.”
3. A transfer is the answer. Because firing people is so very hard, it’s often tempting to instead
pass them off to an unsuspecting colleague at your company, even if they don’t have skills
your colleague needs or are a poor cultural fit. It feels “nicer” than firing them. This is
obviously not so nice for the unsuspecting colleague and is generally a mistake for the
person you’re trying to be “nice” to as well.
4. It’s bad for morale. It’s also tempting to tell yourself that you’re not firing somebody
because doing so would discourage the team. But keeping someone on who can’t do the job
is far worse for morale—yours, the person who’s doing a crummy job, and everyone else
who’s doing a great job. Again, this comes down to having built a good relationship with
the person you’re firing, and the rest of the team. It comes back to having demonstrated that
you care personally.

Be Radically Candid with the person you’re firing
The way you fire people really matters, and to do this hard job well, it’s
important not to distance yourself from the person you’re about to fire. If
you try to avoid feeling the pain that is inherent in the situation, especially

for the person you’re firing, you’ll make a hash of it. To be in the right
frame of mind, remember the following:
1. Recall a job you were terrible at and think how glad you feel that you’re no longer in it.
One summer in high school I got a job as a bank teller. I don’t do math well in my head,
and so I often counted out the wrong change. Since customers generally caught errors in the
bank’s favor but weren’t always honest when they came out ahead, I gave away a lot of the
bank’s money. My boss did not fire me. Instead, she said, “You can do this! If you just try,
if you just focus, you can balance every day!” Now what had just been a math problem felt
like a character flaw. But the harder I tried, the worse I became. Still my boss continued to
cheer me on. I was miserable. I should have quit and gotten a job mowing grass. If my boss
had simply fired me by saying, “You are clearly not interested in this work. Why don’t you
find a different job this summer?” she’d have done me a big favor—and saved the bank a
lot of money. Instead, I suffered and muddled through until the summer’s end. But what if it
had been a permanent job and I had stayed on indefinitely?
When you fire someone, you create the possibility for the person to excel and find
happiness performing meaningful work elsewhere. Part of getting a good job is leaving a
bad one, or one that’s bad for you. As my grandmother once said to me, “There’s a lid for
every pot.” Just because the person is not good at the job they do for you doesn’t mean
there isn’t another job out there they could be great at. I know that this can sound very
Pollyanna-ish, so before our meeting, I try to imagine specifically what that job might be. I
also try to reframe the problem, for both me and the person I’m firing: it’s not the person
who sucks, it’s the job that sucks—at least for this person. What job would be great for that
person? Can I help by making an introduction?
2. Retaining people who are doing bad work penalizes the people doing excellent work.
Failing to deal with a performance issue is not fair to the rest of the team. Work undone
generally winds up getting picked up by the top performers, overburdening them. In
practice, morale has always improved once I’ve removed a poor performer, whereas I’ve
sometimes lost the people I most wanted to keep by hanging on to a low performer for too
long. Retaining a bad boss is especially damaging, because bad bosses have such a negative
impact on the people who report to them. This is the opposite of managerial leverage.
As I’m writing these words, a senior leader I know is putting off firing a bad manager
who substitutes yelling for a knowledge of the facts. One person working under that
manager is developing hives; another has not slept well in months. And still the process
drags on. The manager in question suspects that it is only a matter of time until they get
fired, so the whole situation is like a strange game of cat and mouse. Nothing about the
situation is “nice” to anyone involved!

LOW PERFORMANCE/STEEP GROWTH TRAJECTORY
Manager, look at yourself in the mirror!
ONE OF THE most perplexing management dilemmas is when a person who

ought to be taking on more and more and getting better every day is instead
screwing up or just doing a lousy job. I’ve seen this happen for five
different reasons that are worth parsing.
Wrong role
Sometimes you will put a great person into the wrong job. That is why I
call this the “look at yourself in the mirror” quadrant—if you put somebody
in the wrong role, their poor performance is actually your fault. When this
is the case, you want to put the person in a better role.

For example, I once put “Mareva,” who was one of the best leaders I’ve
ever worked with, on the hardest challenge we faced as a team. The
decision seemed obvious: you match up the people doing the best work
with your hardest problems and the problems get solved. Right? Not so in
this case. Mareva was a great leader of people, and she shone when she was
managing a large team. Her new job, though, was to manage a tiny team.
The potential was huge but the reality was small. Time passed, but the team
wasn’t getting any closer to realizing the potential business opportunity.

The team seemed demoralized, and Mareva seemed, well, bored.
Disengaged. I asked her if she was having issues in her personal life. She
said no. I pushed her to try harder. Nothing changed, so I gave her the
lowest rating she’d ever gotten and then a lower one the next quarter. I
talked with Mareva in detail about why things weren’t going well; she
didn’t disagree with me, but she had no good explanation. I grew
increasingly frustrated and began to worry about her career prospects.
But then it dawned on me; the problem I’d asked her to solve was an
analytical one. The sort of person best suited to solve this problem would be
spending 75 percent of their time alone in an office crunching numbers. But
Mareva’s real gift was that she was a kick-ass boss. I had her stuck in her
office with spreadsheets, where she wasn’t really exercising her talent,
instead of with people. When I shared my revelation with her, the relief on
her face was enormous. Of course, Mareva had known in her gut what the
problem was, but she hadn’t wanted to offer excuses or blame me for her
poor performance. Happily, there was a big, meaty management challenge
involving several hundred people on another team that needed solving. I put
Mareva on it and, sure enough, she was back to being one of the top
performers—not just on my team but at the company.
Another example. “Clay” led a team in a particular country, call it
“Atlantis,” where he was an enormously effective leader and had also
grown revenue faster than anyone else. He wanted a growth opportunity,
and I positioned him to take over another, bigger team in Atlantis. However,
Clay really wanted to move on to a regional role, and he approached me
about it when one opened up on my team. I had significant doubts about the
fit because this job required great political finesse, a skill Clay had not
demonstrated—to his credit as far as I was concerned—but which was
necessary to perform successfully in this particular role. I shared my
concerns frankly with him, but he persisted until I gave in. Almost as soon
as he had assumed his new role, however, he grabbed a political hot potato
and got burned.

It’s not always clear when you are giving people an opportunity to grow
and when you are sending them into the lion’s den, but in this case I made a
bad call. I put Clay in the wrong role. Unfortunately, I left the company and
Clay was eventually fired. I didn’t have the opportunity to look myself in
the mirror, and Clay took the fall for my mistake, which I’ve always felt
terrible about. (Fortunately, he’s gone on to become an enormously
successful entrepreneur in Atlantis.)
New to role; too much too fast
Obviously when you hire someone who has never done a job before and
they have to learn it from scratch, they sometimes take longer than expected
to progress. If the person gives you reason to believe they can be great in
the role, if they show signs of “spiking,” it’s worth investing more. But
sometimes it isn’t that obvious.
In these cases, it can help to ask yourself these questions: are
expectations clear enough? Is the training good enough? If the problem is
that you have not explained the role or the expectations clearly enough, you
should invest more time to do so if you think the person can become a kickass employee.
Another mistake that bosses sometimes make is to dump too much on a
person all at once, setting them up to fail. Sometimes managers simply have
unreasonable expectations about what one human being can do. Other
times, managers map their own capacity onto the people who work for
them. They forget that a person with ten years less experience than they
have simply doesn’t know certain things.
Personal problems
Sometimes people who have been on a tear in their careers suddenly
stop performing well because they are having a personal issue. If the
problem is a temporary one, it’s best simply to give such people the time
they need to get back on track.

I had a family crisis while I was working for Sheryl Sandberg. I will
always be grateful for her response: “Get on a plane, go home, take all the
time you need, and don’t worry about anything at Google. Don’t count this
as your vacation time—just take the time. We have you covered.” Her
words left me feeling luckier than ever to be part of her team—and doubly
motivated when I returned.
Poor fit
Sometimes a person seems to be in the perfect role, given their
experience and expertise, but just can’t get traction at a particular company
or on a team because there is a misalignment between the culture of the
group and the individual’s personality. When a highly successful person
takes a job with a new company and the “fit” isn’t right, it can be painful
for everyone. If neither the culture nor the individual can change, it’s best to
part ways. You generally can’t fix a cultural-fit issue.
For example, I knew a person whose “launch and iterate” approach
made him enormously successful at Google. Google’s culture was all about
experimentation. When he got to Apple, which had a culture of perfecting
and polishing ideas before launching them, he tried the same thing, and it
killed his credibility. There was nothing wrong with the person or with
Apple—it was just a bad fit.

NO PERMANENT MARKERS
People change, and you have to change with them
IT’S HARD NOT to lock in your perceptions of people. “Jane is a rock star.

Once a rock star, always a rock star.” “Sean is my Rock of Gibraltar. I’d be
lost without him in his role.” My biggest concern with the terms “rock star”
and “superstar” is that you’ll use them as permanent labels for people.
Please do not! It’s tempting to see certain people as fit only for a certain
role or having a certain set of skills/weaknesses that will never change. The

truth is, people really do change. Somebody who’s been on a gradual
growth trajectory may suddenly become restless and yearn for a new
challenge at work. Or, a person who’s been on a steep growth trajectory for
years may be craving a period of stability. This is another reason why you
have to manage. Being a great boss involves constantly adjusting to the new
reality of the day or week or year as it unfolds. But you can’t adjust if you
haven’t been paying attention or if you don’t know the person well enough
to notice that something significant has shifted.
It’s not only important to remember that nobody is always on a steep or
growth trajectory; people’s performance changes over time, too. Be careful
not to label people as “high performers.” Everybody has an off quarter
occasionally. To combat permanent labels, Qualtrics cofounder (and my
colleague from Juice and Google) Jared Smith came up with the
performance ratings “off quarter,” “solid quarter,” and “exceptional
quarter.”
Such adjustments are particularly hard when it comes time to move
people who have been making your life easier into new roles that will make
your life harder—at least in the short term. You have relied on “Jean” to get
a particular job done well for years. Now Jean wants a new job. Or, “Pat”
has been picking up new challenges for years, and now Pat is ready to quit
changing roles so often; you have to hand those off to somebody without
the same track record of success that Pat has. It’s stressful for you!
Over the course of our careers, most of us go through waves. Sometimes
we are in learning mode or transition mode. Sometimes our priorities
change: a spouse takes a new job and we need to be home more, or we want
to devote time to a passion outside work. It is important for the team
member and the boss to be clear about what is driving the degree of
trajectory at each juncture, so that both the team member and the company
can benefit.
So use this simple framework, but don’t abuse it. Make sure that you are
seeing each person on your team with fresh eyes every day. People evolve,

and so your relationships must evolve with them. Care personally; don’t put
people in boxes and leave them there.

4.
DRIVE RESULTS
COLLABORATIVELY
Telling people what to do doesn’t work
TELLING PEOPLE WHAT TO DO DIDN’T WORK AT
GOOGLE
AT FIRST BLUSH,

it seems like achieving results is more a matter of
challenging directly than caring personally. But the ultimate goal of Radical
Candor is to achieve collaboratively what you could never achieve
individually, and to do that, you need to care about the people you’re
working with.
Steve Squyres, who led the Mars Exploration Rover Mission, described
perfectly the thrill of collaboration: “Over four thousand people have
worked on this mission. There’s no one person who can really get their
arms around the whole thing and say, ‘I understand everything about this
vehicle.’ It burst the bounds of our brains.” I was sitting next to Larry Page
when I watched the documentary, and he turned to me and said, “Wow, that
really makes you feel like you can achieve something doesn’t it?” On the
one hand I agreed, wholeheartedly. On the other hand, it seemed nuts that

the guy who cofounded Google needed to watch a documentary to make
him feel like he could achieve something.
If you want your team to achieve something bigger than you could
achieve alone, if you want to “burst the bounds of your brain,” you have to
care about the people you are working with. You’ll get more done if you
take the time to incorporate their thinking into yours, and yours into theirs.
Don’t let your focus on results get in the way of caring about the people
you work with. I made that mistake when I first got to Google. I was laserfocused on getting stuff done, and fast. That slowed me down in the end.
The AdSense team I was leading was responsible for sales and support
of small and medium AdSense customers. We had five main jobs: to
approve new customers, bring them on board, offer account management,
provide customer support, and enforce policy. There were about one
hundred people doing this work, and when I arrived on the scene things had
been growing crazy-fast, so it was something of a free-for-all; everybody
did a little bit of everything. When the team was behind on approvals and
somebody happened to notice, they’d send a blast email out to all one
hundred people, saying, “Please stop what you’re doing and work on
approvals.” If nobody noticed, we just got further behind. Google was dataobsessed, so everything was tracked. But when the numbers went in the
wrong direction there was a collective sense of guilt, rather than a clear plan
to fix the problem, since nobody was accountable for any one thing. We
weren’t executing well, and everyone was stressed.
One of my mentors once told me, “There’s a fine line between success
and failure.” Now I saw what he meant. By any normal measure, our
growth was great, but it quickly became clear it could be a lot better if we
operated less like a soccer team of seven-year-olds: all of us chasing the
ball, none of us in position. For example, after asking a bunch of questions,
I realized we weren’t doing any real account management (i.e., we weren’t
working with our biggest customers to help them improve in ways that
would make them, and Google, more money.) When I asked why, the
answer was “That wouldn’t be Googley! We treat all our customers exactly

the same, no matter how big or small they are.” My suggestion that we
prioritize was met with looks that made it clear my very morality was
suspect.
The reporting structure was faulty as well, which was why there was no
real accountability. When a new person got hired, they were assigned
randomly to the manager who had the fewest direct reports. But there was
no particular relationship between the work they were doing and who their
boss was. And, per Google’s culture, they didn’t really see why they needed
to have bosses, other than to give the bosses “leadership experience” so
they could get into business school. Having a boss on paper was a necessary
evil people had to put up with so that they, too, could become bosses and
get into business school.
What a mess! How could such a nonsensical situation arise at such a
successful company? A friend of mine didn’t at first believe this story. At
The New Yorker, she said, the fact-checkers would never report to the head
of the copyediting department, because only the head of the fact-checking
department would really understand their work. What was going on at
Google? Actually, I’ve seen even crazier stuff happen at other Silicon
Valley “unicorns.”1 When a company led by extremely bright but
inexperienced people takes off, anything can happen. But I relished the
mess, since it was why I’d been hired. At thirty-seven, I was older than my
boss, and more than a decade older than the average Googler. I was “adult
supervision.”
And I knew exactly what to do. Rather than having a team of one
hundred in which everybody did a little bit of everything, with a random
management structure, I created five smaller teams. I made each of the
managers working for me accountable for just one thing: approvals or onboarding or account management or customer support or policy. Then, I
reshuffled everyone’s direct reports so that the more sales-y people would
work as one team, reporting to the manager responsible for account
management; the more structured people would work on one team,
reporting to the manager responsible for policy; and so forth. Now, people’s

bosses would understand their work, and could both help their direct
reports, and be held accountable.
An entirely reasonable change, don’t you agree? The result: three of my
five direct reports complained to my boss, Sheryl Sandberg, that they
couldn’t stand working for me—I was too autocratic, I left too many people
out of important decisions. One even described feeling “sad and bad and
left out.” All three left to join other Google teams, as they were free to do,
without my permission. Where had I gone wrong? What needed to happen
had seemed so obvious. I went to Sheryl for advice.
She agreed with the way I’d restructured the work, but not with the way
I’d gone about it. “Kim, you’re moving too fast. It’s like you’re spinning a
long rope,” Sheryl said, miming an imaginary rope spinning in a big circle
over her head. “It doesn’t seem like the rope is going that fast to you
because you’re in the center holding it, just flicking your wrists. But if
you’re at the end of the rope, you’re hanging on for dear life. It’s scary. You
can’t do that to people and expect them to stick around.”
Telling people what to do didn’t work. At a time when we were
obviously in need of big changes, it had seemed like it was the fastest way
forward, but it wasn’t. First, because I didn’t involve my team in decisionmaking; I just made the decisions myself. Second, because even after
making them I didn’t take the time to explain why or to persuade the team
I’d made good decisions. So, instead of executing on decisions they didn’t
agree with or even understand, my team dissolved, and I wasn’t going to
improve our results until I rebuilt it.
The great thing about working at Google was that the company gave me
a chance to fix my mistake. My boss explained exactly what I’d done
wrong—and then let me hire people to replace those I’d lost. I was able to
bring several people who’d worked for me at Juice to Google. It was a
painful but instructive lesson: to drive results at Google, I had to learn to be
more collaborative.
Decisions really didn’t get made by authority at Google—not even by
the founders. At one point, Google’s engineers decided to redesign the

AdWords2 front end to make it easier for advertisers to choose different
kinds of ad formats. Since most of Google’s revenue came from AdWords,
it was important to get this right. In one meeting, I watched Google
cofounder Sergey Brin try to persuade a team of engineers to try his
solution to the challenge of presenting to advertisers all the choices they
had—different kinds of ad formats, different ways to make sure their ads
showed up when and where they wanted, etc.—in the simplest possible
way. The team proposed a different solution from Sergey’s. He suggested
that they put a couple of people working on his approach and let the rest of
the team pursue their favored solution. The team refused.
Sergey, in a rare burst of frustration, banged the table and said, “If this
were an ordinary company, you’d all be doing it my way. I just want a
couple of people to try my idea!” He was clearly exasperated, but his grin
showed that he was also proud of having built a team that would stand up to
him. In the end, the team convinced him that theirs was the better way.
Of course, not all companies insist on collaboration or let anyone
change teams when they are unhappy with their boss. But I’ve found, again
and again, that even if you work at a place that allows you to act in a more
authoritarian way, you’ll get better results if you lay your power down and
work more collaboratively.

TELLING PEOPLE WHAT TO DO DIDN’T WORK FOR STEVE
JOBS EITHER
“FUCKING STEVE ALWAYS gets it right,” barked Andy Grove, Intel’s legendary

CEO, over a cup of Jamoca Almond Fudge at Baskin-Robbins in Los Altos.
I was asking his advice on whether I should join Apple.
I laughed, thinking he was making a joke, but Andy shook his head at
me vehemently. “No. You didn’t understand me. Steve really always gets it
right. I mean it, precisely, like an engineer. I am not joking, and I am not
exaggerating.”

I knew Andy was telling me something important, and a part of me
hoped it was true. One of the things that was appealing about going to
Apple after Google’s creative chaos was seeing what it would be like to
work at a company where more assertive management, even telling people
what to do, actually worked. I assumed that was how things got done at
Apple—that Steve Jobs, visionary, told people what to do. But I still
assumed Andy was exaggerating. Always right?
“Nobody’s always right,” I said.
“I didn’t say Steve is always right. I said he always gets it right. Like
anyone, he is wrong sometimes, but he insists, and not gently either, that
people tell him when he’s wrong, so he always gets it right in the end.”
Andy’s words tapped into a complex and somewhat paradoxical set of
beliefs and ideals I had about how great bosses get a team to execute well.
On the one hand, I loved Google’s approach and subscribed to the Antoine
de Saint-Exupéry school of management: “If you want to build a ship, don’t
drum up people to collect wood and don’t assign them tasks and work, but
rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea.” On the
other hand, as my anecdote about the beginning of my time with AdSense
reveals, I also occasionally longed either to have or to be an uncontested
leader.
After I took the job at Apple, I learned that Andy’s description had been
accurate. Steve often demonstrated that he was willing—eager, even—to
change his mind when he was proven wrong. But this rarely played out in a
gracious “You were right, the mistake was mine” manner. People were often
infuriated by the way that Steve changed his mind.
One colleague told me about a time he’d argued with Steve but
eventually backed down, even though he wasn’t convinced by Steve’s
reasoning. When events subsequently proved my colleague right, Steve
marched into his office and started yelling. “But this was your idea,” said
my colleague. “Yes, and it was your job to convince me I was wrong,”
Steve replied, “and you failed!” From then on, my colleague argued longer
and more loudly, and he kept arguing until either he convinced Steve he was

right or Steve convinced him he was wrong. Thus, Steve got it right by
being willing to be wrong and by insisting that the people around him
challenge him. There is no doubt that his style didn’t work for everyone. He
hired people who were not afraid to argue with him, and then he pushed that
fearlessness further.
Another colleague told me about an argument she’d had with Steve. She
eventually persuaded him he was wrong, but then he so thoroughly adopted
her position that it was as if it had been his all along. She speculated that
Steve was so focused on getting to the right answer that he genuinely didn’t
care who’d said what. Obviously, this approach could be frustrating—
people want credit for their ideas. But the relentless focus on challenging
himself and those around him to “get it” right rather than to “be” right was
part of what drove Apple’s breathtaking ability to execute so well.

THE ART OF GETTING STUFF DONE WITHOUT TELLING
PEOPLE WHAT TO DO
CERTAINLY PART OF why Steve “always got it right” was that he was a genius.

You can’t operationalize or imitate genius. But genius was only part of the
story; there are plenty of geniuses with brilliant ideas who can’t turn them
into anything tangible. More important than genius was the way Steve led
people at Apple to execute so flawlessly without telling them what to do.
This is something you can operationalize and imitate. To do it, though,
you’ll have to push yourself and your team further out on the “challenge
directly” axis than will probably be immediately comfortable.
In fact, both Google and Apple achieved spectacular results without a
purely autocratic style. This leads to important questions: how did everyone
in the company decide what to do? How did strategy and goals get set?
How did the cultures at these two companies, so strong and so different,
develop? How did tens of thousands of people come to understand the
mission? It played out very differently at both companies—more orderly at

Apple, more chaotic at Google—but at a high level, the process was the
same.
The process, which I call the “Get Stuff Done” (GSD) wheel, is
relatively straightforward. But the key, often ignored by people who think
of themselves as “Get Stuff Done” people, is to avoid the impulse to dive
right in, as I did in the example that begins this chapter. Instead, you have to
first lay the groundwork for collaboration.

When run effectively, the GSD wheel will enable your team to achieve
more collectively than anyone could ever dream of achieving individually
—to burst the bounds of your brain. First, you have to listen to the ideas
that people on your team have and create a culture in which they listen to
each other. Next, you have create space in which ideas can be sharpened
and clarified, to make sure these ideas don’t get crushed before everyone
fully understands their potential usefulness. But just because an idea is easy
to understand doesn’t mean it’s a good one. Next, you have to debate ideas
and test them more rigorously. Then you need to decide—quickly, but not
too quickly. Since not everyone will have been involved in the listenclarify-debate-decide part of the cycle for every idea, the next step is to
bring the broader team along. You have to persuade those who weren’t
involved in a decision that it was a good one, so that everyone can execute
it effectively. Then, having executed, you have to learn from the results,

whether or not you did the right thing, and start the whole process over
again.
That’s a lot of steps. Remember, they are designed to be cycled through
quickly. Not skipping a step and not getting stuck on one are equally
important. If you skip a step, you’ll waste time in the end. If you allow any
part of the process to drag out, working on your team will feel like paying a
collaboration tax, not making a collaboration investment.
You may very well be in a situation where your boss is skipping steps
and just telling you what to do. Does that mean you have to do the same
with your team? No, of course not! You can put these ideas into practice
with the people who report to you even if your boss doesn’t subscribe to
this method of getting things done. When your boss sees the results, things
may change. But, if they don’t, you may have to change jobs. When more
people insist on a positive working environment, not only will results for
your company improve, your happiness will as well.

LISTEN
“Give the quiet ones a voice.”
—JONY IVE
YOU ALREADY KNOW you’re supposed to listen, and you probably already

know how (and how not) to listen. The problem is that when you become
the boss, people are predisposed to tell you that you must totally change
your style of listening, and you can’t do that.
The good news is you can stick to your own style and still make sure
that everyone on your team gets heard and is thus able to contribute.

Jony Ive, Apple’s chief design officer, once said at an Apple University
class that a manager’s most important role is to “give the quiet ones a
voice.” I love this. Google CEO Eric Schmidt took the opposite approach,
urging people to “Be loud!” I love this, too. The two leaders took different
approaches to ensure that everyone was heard. This is your goal as well, but
there is more than one way to achieve it. You have to find a way to listen
that fits your personal style, and then create a culture in which everyone
listens to each other, so that all the burden of listening doesn’t fall on you.
Quiet listening
Tim Cook, Apple’s CEO, is the master of silence. Before I interviewed
at Apple, a friend warned me that Tim tended to allow long silences and
that I shouldn’t let it unnerve me or feel the need to fill them. Despite this
warning, in our first interview I reacted to a long period of silence by
anxiously talking nonstop, and in the process inadvertently told him far
more about a mistake I’d made than I had intended. Just when I realized,
panic-stricken, that I was about to reveal something that might well cost me
the job, the room began to shake.
“Earthquake?” I asked, with what I suspect was undisguised relief.
Tim nodded, looking up at the movement of the walls. “Pretty goodsized one too, I’d say.”
Seizing the chance to listen rather than talk, I asked about the building’s
design, which the engineer in Tim couldn’t resist describing to me. Because

the building was on top of rollers, the earthquake’s movement felt more
pronounced; scarier but safer. Tim smiled at the contradiction.
Following in Tim’s footsteps, one of my students in the Managing at
Apple class said that he tried to make sure to spend at least ten minutes in
every one-on-one meeting listening silently, without reacting in any way.
He would keep his facial expression and body language totally neutral.
“What did you learn in that ten minutes that you didn’t learn the other
fifty?” I asked.
“I heard the things I didn’t want to hear,” my student said, validating
Tim’s technique. “If I gave any reaction at all, people would often tell me
what they thought I wanted to hear. I found that they were much more likely
to say what they really thought—even if it wasn’t what I was hoping to hear
—when I was careful not to show what I thought.”
There are real advantages to quiet listening, but it also has a downside.
When you’re the boss and people don’t know what you think, they waste a
lot of time trying to guess. Some will even use your name in vain—“Well,
what the boss wants to do is X”—and then go on to describe what they want
to do instead. And since nobody can be sure what you really think, they can
sometimes get away with it. In addition, plenty of people are made very
uncomfortable by silence, as the examples above demonstrate. It can feel
like playing a high-risk poker game instead of having a Radically Candid
conversation. Some people feel a quiet listener is not listening at all but
instead setting a trap: waiting for others to say the wrong thing so they can
pounce.
If you’re a quiet listener, then, you need to take steps to reassure those
made uncomfortable by your style. Don’t be pointlessly inscrutable. To get
others to say what they think, you need to say what you think sometimes,
too. If you want to be challenged, you need to be willing to challenge. The
manager in my class was expressionless for only ten minutes of his 1:1s,
not the full hour. If he’d been utterly expressionless the whole time, it
would have been hard for people to trust him or to relate to him. Tim Cook
wasn’t always silent either, of course. But because he was generally so

quiet, people leaned forward to listen to what he said. And when he spoke,
albeit very quietly, his thinking was always crystal clear.
Quiet listening clearly works for many managers, but I cannot pull it off.
Luckily, there is another model.
Loud listening
If quiet listening involves being silent to give people room to talk, loud
listening is about saying things intended to get a reaction out of them. This
was the way Steve Jobs listened. He would put a strong point of view on the
table and insist on a response. Why do I call this listening, instead of
talking, or even yelling? Because Steve didn’t just challenge others; he
insisted that they challenge him back.
Obviously this approach works only when people feel confident enough
to rise to the challenge. Just as some people are spooked by quiet listening,
other people are offended by loud listening. If you are a loud listener, how
do you deal with people who are either constitutionally unable to stand up
to an aggressive boss or whose position is too marginal to allow them to
feel secure, even if the larger culture welcomes this behavior? How do you
listen to a person who has just started at the company and doesn’t feel
established enough to take a high-profile stand? That person might know a
good reason why you are wrong. And yet they won’t speak up.
If you have a loud listening style, you need to go to some lengths to
build the confidence of those whom you’re making uncomfortable. And as
people witness one another challenging the boss, they will grow to feel it’s
safe to do so as well. Jony Ive said that Steve would often come to him and
say, “Jony, here’s a dopey idea.…” He wasn’t quiet about his idea, but he
was inviting Jony to challenge it by calling it dopey.
Randy Nelson, the dean of Pixar University and a faculty member at
Apple University, captured this when he said of Steve Jobs, “He’s a lion. If
he roars at you, you’d better roar back just as loudly—but only if you really
are a lion, too. Otherwise he’ll eat you for lunch.”

Steve didn’t surround himself with people who’d tell him when he was
wrong by making everybody feel comfortable. The people who worked
closely with him knew they had better speak up when they saw a problem
or a flaw in his logic, or face his wrath later. This didn’t mean they had to
be loud themselves. Steve worked really well with both Tim Cook and Jony
Ive and both of them were quiet listeners. But they did have to be strong
and super-confident.
You don’t have to adopt Steve’s style to be a loud listener. Paul Saffo, an
engineering professor at Stanford, describes a technique he calls “strong
opinions, weakly held.” Saffo has made the point that expressing strong,
some might say outrageous, positions with others is a good way to get to a
better answer, or at least to have a more interesting conversation. I love this
approach. I’ve always found that saying what I think really clearly and then
going to great lengths to encourage disagreement is a good way to listen. I
tend to state my positions strongly, so I have had to learn to follow up with,
“Please poke holes in this idea—I know it may be terrible. So tell me all the
reasons we should not do that.” Once I put a YOU WERE RIGHT, I WAS WRONG
trophy on somebody’s desk after her position on something proved to be
correct and mine dead wrong.
Loud listening—stating a point of view strongly—offers a quick way to
expose opposing points of view or flaws in reasoning. It also prevents
people from wasting a lot of time trying to figure out what the boss thinks.
Assuming that you are surrounded with people who don’t hesitate to
challenge what you say, stating it clearly can be the fastest way to get to the
best answer.
Perhaps most important is to stick to the style that feels most natural to
you. Many leadership books push for quiet listening. But if you’re a loud
listener, it’s really hard to follow that advice. Attempting to behave in ways
that feel deeply unnatural can make your team feel less comfortable with
you rather than more so. Instead, try to strengthen your awareness of how
your style makes your colleagues feel and work on improving that dynamic.
Figure out how to listen to give the quiet ones a voice without weirding out

their louder colleagues. You don’t want a tyranny of the most verbose on
your team; you want to get to the best answer together.
Create a culture of listening
It’s hard enough to get yourself to listen to your team members and let
them know you are listening; getting them to listen to one another is even
harder. The keys are 1) have a simple system for employees to use to
generate ideas and voice complaints, 2) make sure that at least some of the
issues raised are quickly addressed, and 3) regularly offer explanations as to
why the other issues aren’t being addressed. This system should not merely
empower anyone to point out things that could be better but also enable
others to help fix those things or make changes. You have to agree to let
them ask you for some help, and to champion the system enthusiastically.
Define clear boundaries of how much time you can spend—and then make
sure that time is highly impactful.
At Google, people constantly came to me with good ideas—more than I
could handle, in fact—and it became overwhelming. So I organized an
“ideas team” to consider them. For context, I circulated an article from
Harvard Business Review (HBR) that explained how a culture that captures
thousands of “small” innovations can create benefits for customers that are
impossible for competitors to imitate. One big idea is pretty easy to copy,
but thousands of tweaks are impossible to see from the outside, let alone
imitate.3
Next, I talked through some key principles that ought to guide the ideas
team, first among them empowerment. The ideas team had to commit to
listening to any idea that anyone brought to them, to explain clearly why
they rejected the ideas they rejected, and to help people implement ideas
that the ideas team deemed worthwhile. If somebody’s idea seemed
especially promising, they could even negotiate with the person’s manager
to give them some time off from their “day job” to work on implementing
it. They were encouraged to assign me up to three action items a week.

After this innovation, instead of feeling stressed whenever I would hear
a cool idea in a meeting or receive an inspired email, I could react
enthusiastically and delegate it to the ideas team. Soon, lots of people were
submitting ideas they had for improving the product, growing the business,
and making our processes more efficient. We created an ideas tool
(basically just a wiki) that allowed people to submit an idea, have it
reviewed by the team, and voted up or down. That was a form of listening,
and people whose ideas got voted up definitely felt heard by their
colleagues. People whose ideas were not voted up knew that their ideas had
been explicitly rejected: a much clearer signal than radio silence from
overburdened management. However, a vote is not always the best way to
identify the best ideas, or to make sure people are listening to each other.
Therefore, I asked the ideas team to read all the ideas and talk to all the
people who submitted them—to listen. After that development, the team
used a combination of votes and judgment to select the best ideas.
More important, the ideas team helped people get the selected ideas
implemented. Occasionally this was about getting time for people to work
on them, or getting some input from me, but often all it took was just the
validation and encouragement that came from listening and responding.
“Yes, that’s a cool idea! Do it!”
Sarah Teng, a recent college graduate on the AdSense team, came up
with the idea of using programmable keyboards to create shortcuts for
phrases or paragraphs they used over and over when communicating with
customers. It seemed like a good idea, so the ideas team asked me to
approve the budget to buy programmable keypads. I did as they asked, and
this simple idea increased the global team’s efficiency by 133 percent. This
meant that everyone on the team had to spend far less time typing the same
damn words over and over and had more time to come up with other good
ideas—a virtuous cycle. Bam!
When Sarah presented her project to the team, I didn’t just thank her; I
also showed a graph of how this idea would improve our efficiency over
time. But efficiency is not what people cared most about, so I also stressed

to the team how her innovation would make people’s jobs more fun and
help them grow in their careers, since they’d get to spend less time doing
grunt work and more time doing work they found interesting. I explained
that Sarah would have an opportunity to share her idea with leaders from
another, much larger team, for an even larger impact. And I sent around
again the HBR article showing how competitive advantage tends to come
not from one great idea but the combination of hundreds of smaller ones.
Why did I add all that context? First, to demonstrate just how great the
impact of her idea was. The use of programmable keypads by itself was
hardly revolutionary, but when people saw the cumulative effect of that idea
and others like it over time, Sarah’s innovation felt a lot bigger. Second, it
inspired people who had other ideas like this to be vocal about them. Third,
and most importantly, it encouraged people to listen to each other’s ideas, to
take them seriously, and to help one another implement them without
waiting for management’s blessing. It’s so easy to lose “small” ideas in big
organizations, and if you do you kill incremental innovation.
Hundreds of really smart people had been working in Online Sales and
Operations for years. It was hard for me to believe that nobody else had
ever had the programmable keypad idea before, but if they had,
management hadn’t listened. If you can build a culture where people listen
to one another, they will start to fix things you as the boss never even knew
were broken.
Most meaningful to me was that morale on the team soared. At one
point the “Googlegeist” survey on employee morale showed that the team
of people who were answering customer support emails for AdSense felt
much better about the role that innovation played in their work than the
engineers working on Search did—despite the fact that those engineers
were probably some of the most creative engineers in the world.
Sometimes creating a culture of listening is simply a matter of managing
meetings the right way. When just a couple of people were doing all the
talking at a meeting, I’d stop and go around the table to ensure that
everyone got heard. Other times, I would stand up in the next meeting and

walk around, physically blocking a person who was talking too much.
Sometimes I’d have a quick conversation with people before a meeting,
asking some to pipe up and others to pipe down. In other words, part of my
job was to constantly figure out new ways to “give the quiet ones a voice.”
Adapt to a culture of listening
My friend Astrid Tuminez has a great story about how important it is to
adapt to a culture of listening in a new situation. She grew up in a tiny
fishing village in the slums of the Philippines but went on to have a career
that spanned Moscow (where I worked with her), New York, and
Singapore. While working at the U.S. Institute of Peace, she was invited to
work on the peace process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in the
southern Philippines. When she first arrived, she acted like a New Yorker—
very business-like, making back-to-back appointments.
Then a member of the Philippine negotiating team told her that someone
from the Muslim/Moro group had sent a note to Manila saying, “Who is
this woman and what planet is she from?” The person who gave Astrid
feedback was particularly invested in Astrid’s success because they had
connected over the fact that they were from the same province.
To the Muslims, Astrid had come across as unfeeling, inhospitable, and
foreign (even though she was Filipino and could speak Filipino). Thinking
it over, she realized that she’d made some significant mistakes—such as
hosting meetings with people without offering them real food, which was so
important in the culture. She spent the next few months listening, and
making only “loose” appointments. She attended public events and made
the rounds without scheduling people back-to-back. And she made sure she
had a lot of food available when she hosted meetings.
By taking time to get to know people and by just listening she was able
to build trust and show she cared deeply about the peace process.
Eventually the Moros became very willing to speak to her and to take her
places where other outsiders couldn’t or wouldn’t go. It made all the

difference in her ability to be effective in the complex and nuanced
negotiations her job required.

CLARIFY
“It is only by selection, by elimination, and by emphasis that we get at the real meaning of
things.”
—GEORGIA O’KEEFFE
ONCE YOU’VE CREATED a culture of listening, the next step is to push yourself

and your direct reports to understand and convey thoughts and ideas more
clearly. Trying to solve a problem that hasn’t been clearly defined is not
likely to result in a good solution; debating a half-baked idea is likely to kill
it. As the boss, you are the editor, not the author.
Speaking at an Apple memorial service for Steve Jobs, Jony Ive noted
that Steve Jobs had understood how important it was to nurture and clarify
new ideas. “He treated the process of creativity with a rare and a wonderful
reverence,” Jony said. “He understood that while ideas ultimately can be so
powerful, they begin as fragile, barely formed thoughts, so easily missed, so
easily compromised, so easily just squished.”
New ideas don’t have to be grandiose plans for the next iPad. Your team
may be saying something like, “I’m frustrated by this process,” or “I’m not
feeling as energized by my work as I was,” or “I think our sales pitch could
be stronger,” or “I’d do better work if there were more natural light in the
office,” or “What if we just stopped doing X?” or “I’d like to start working
on Y.”

Of course, it’s tempting to shut down in the face of these sorts of
statements—“I don’t have time to deal with this right now!” But taking the
moments to help clarify the ideas will save you time in the long run. Take
the time to help your direct reports explain what they mean, so that they can
do something about fixing the problem or pursuing the opportunity rather
than just complaining about it.
It’s important to push the people on your team to clarify their thinking
and ideas so that you don’t “squish” their best thinking or ignore problems
that are bothering them. It’s not just important to understand new ideas
clearly; it’s equally important, and often more difficult, to understand the
people to whom your team will have to explain the ideas clearly.
Be clear in your own mind
Create a safe space to nurture new ideas

Part of your job as the boss is to help people think through their ideas
before submitting them to the rough-and-tumble of debate. Russ Laraway
explained that I was doing this all wrong when I told my team at Google not
to bring me problems; instead, I told them, bring me three solutions and a
recommendation. “But then you’re not helping people innovate,” Russ
explained. “You’re asking them to make decisions before they’ve had time
to think things through. When do they get to just talk, brainstorm with
you?” I realized Russ was right; I was abdicating an important part of my
job by insisting on the “three solutions and a recommendation” approach.

Susan Wojcicki, who is now CEO of YouTube, was great at helping her
team nurture new ideas before they got bruised in debates. Early in
Google’s history, people brought new ideas directly to Google’s Executive
Management Group (EMG). That group included the founders, the CEO,
and a number of executives. Debate in those meetings could be brutal, and
they started to feel like the place where new ideas went to die. Susan,
recognizing the stress this caused for her team and the danger it posed for
innovation at Google, stepped up and created a pre-EMG meeting where
new ideas could be developed. Here people could help one another sharpen
new ideas, or define problems more clearly.
There’s a lot of research demonstrating that when companies help
people develop new ideas by creating the space and time to clarify their
thinking, innovation flourishes.4 Throughout Silicon Valley, different
companies have experimented with different ways to give people that kind
of freedom. Google famously has 20-percent time, where anybody can
theoretically work on any idea they want to with 20 percent of their regular
full-time hours. Not too many take 20-percent time, so this policy belongs
more to the fantasy Google than the real Google. But fantasy informs reality
—and it’s also true that a number of important products, including Gmail,
did start as 20-percent-time projects.
Scott Forstall, who built the iOS team at Apple, experimented with a
different approach, called Blue Sky. People came up with a project they
wanted to work on and could apply to Blue Sky. If approved, they got two
weeks off from their day job to further develop the idea. Similarly, Twitter,
Dropbox, and many start-ups have regular Hack Weeks throughout the year
during which people can spend time pursuing new ideas.
Brainstorming sessions are often used to surface and clarify new ideas.
These sessions are not just random conversations where nobody is allowed
to say anything negative, though. There are plenty of bad ideas, and they
need to be recognized as such. Poking holes in new ideas doesn’t
necessarily kill them—it can push people to clarify their thinking. There are
also great ideas that look bad at first blush. A good brainstorming session

distinguishes between the two without killing too many good ideas or
wasting too much time on the bad ones. Pixar has a technique called
“plussing.” Rather than saying, “No, that is a bad idea,” people must offer a
solution to the problem they are pointing out.
Less dramatic than these kinds of formalized meetings and programs are
your weekly 1:1s. (See Chapter Eight for specific suggestions on making
1:1s more productive.) These meetings should be a safe place for your
direct reports to come and talk to you about new ideas. In this context, you
shouldn’t judge the ideas but rather help your direct reports clarify their
thinking. This is a form of “plussing.” You can point out problems but with
the aim of figuring a way around those problems, not killing ideas.
Be clear to others
Make thoughts/ideas drop-dead easy for others to comprehend

When I was at business school, one of my professors told a story about a
meeting between President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and the economist
John Maynard Keynes. FDR was enormously busy, but he spent well over
an hour with this academic. If FDR had understood Keynesian economics,
some think the Great Depression might have ended sooner and enormous
suffering could have been prevented. But at the end of the meeting, the
president was not persuaded.
My professor asked the question, “Whose fault was it? FDR’s for not
understanding, or Keynes’s for not explaining it well?” This was one of
those moments in my education that changed my life. I’d always shifted the
burden of responsibility for understanding to the listener, not to the
explainer. But now I saw that if Keynes’s genius was locked inside his head,
it may as well not have existed. It was his responsibility to make the ideas
that seemed so obvious to him equally obvious to FDR. He failed. Far too
often we assume that if somebody doesn’t understand what we’re telling
them, it’s because they are “stupid” or “closed minded.” That is very rarely
the case. While we know our subject matter, we may fail to know the

person to whom we are explaining the subject, and therefore may fail to get
our idea across.
You’ll be heard more accurately if you take the time to understand the
people you are talking to. What do they know, what don’t they know? What
details do you need to include to make it easy for them to understand—and,
more importantly, what details can you leave out?
When you are listening to people on your team, take on the
responsibility to understand—to actually listen—rather than putting the
burden to communicate onto them. But when you are helping them prepare
to explain their ideas to others—whether they are peers or cross-functional
colleagues or executives—it’s your job to push your direct reports, and
yourself, to do a better job than Keynes did. You need to push them to
communicate with such precision and clarity that it’s impossible not to
grasp their argument.
Georgia O’Keeffe said, “It is only by selection, by elimination, and by
emphasis that we get at the real meaning of things.” Choosing what to
select, what to eliminate, and what to emphasize depends not only on the
idea but on the audience. If you are sending an email about a challenge at
work to your grandmother, you may want to emphasize how it impacts your
love life and perhaps choose to pass over revenue implications entirely. If
you are writing to your boss about the same subject, it will probably be the
reverse. The essence of making an idea clear requires a deep understanding
not only of the idea but also of the person to whom one is explaining the
idea.
The next time you spend two hours helping somebody edit an email
until it’s just two sentences, don’t feel you are wasting your time. You are
getting to the essence of the idea, which allows the recipient to absorb it
quickly and easily. And you are teaching an invaluable skill.

DEBATE
The rock tumbler

ONCE YOU’VE SPENT all that time clarifying an idea—getting it really clear in

your own mind and making it easy for others to understand—it’s tempting
to feel like you’re done. Not so fast! The point of spending all that time in
clarification mode was just to get the idea ready for a debate. If you skip the
debate phase, you’ll make worse decisions, you’ll be unable to persuade
everyone who needs to execute, and you’ll ultimately slow down or grind to
a halt. Once again, you don’t have to be in every debate—in fact, you
shouldn’t be. But you’ve got to make sure that they happen, and that there is
a culture of debate on your team.

When Steve Jobs was a kid, his neighbor showed him a rock tumbler—a
can that spun on a motor. The neighbor asked Steve to gather up some
ordinary rocks from the yard. He took the stones, threw them into the can,
added some grit, turned on the motor, and, over the racket, asked Steve to
come back two days later. When Steve returned to the noisy clatter of the
garage, the neighbor turned off the contraption and Steve was astounded to
see how the ordinary rocks had become beautiful polished stones. Steve
would later say that when a team debated, both the ideas and the people
came out more beautiful—results well worth all the friction and noise.5
Your job as a boss is to turn on that “rock tumbler.” Too many bosses
think their role is to turn it off—to avoid all the friction by simply making a
decision and sparing the team the pain of debate. It’s not. Debate takes time
and requires emotional energy. But lack of debate saps a team of more time
and emotional energy in the long run.

Of course, it’s also possible to leave the rock tumbler on too long,
leaving nothing in the can but some dust. Here are some ideas that can help
you keep debate going without grinding everyone down too much.
Keep the conversation focused on ideas not egos
Make sure that individual egos and self-interest don’t get in the way of
an objective quest for the best answer.6 Nothing is a bigger time-sucker or
blocker to getting it right than ego. On a broad level, this means intervening
when you start to sense that people are thinking, “I’m going to win this
argument,” or “my idea versus your idea,” or “my recommendation versus
your recommendation,” or “my team feels…” Redirect them to focus on the
facts; don’t allow people to attribute ownership to ideas, and don’t get
hijacked by how others who aren’t in the room might (or might not) feel.
Remind people what the goal is: to get to the best answer, as a team. You’re
creating a collaboration of great minds, not monitoring a high school debate
competition or running a presidential election. If you have to, set ground
rules at the beginning of the meeting, or—if your team would find it
amusing and useful rather than ridiculous—put a prop like an “ego coat
check” outside the door.
Another way to help people search for the best answer instead of
seeking ego validation is to make them switch roles. If a person has been
arguing for A, ask them to start arguing for B. If a debate is likely to go on
for some time, warn people in advance that you’re going to ask them to
switch roles. When people know that they will be asked to argue another
person’s point, they will naturally listen more attentively.
Create an obligation to dissent
I once interned at McKinsey for a summer, and what impressed me most
about the company was its ability to spur productive debate. How’d they do
it? McKinsey had very consciously created an “obligation to dissent.” If
everyone around the table agreed, that was a red flag. Somebody had to

take up the dissenting voice. McKinsey alums often brought this with them
into the companies they later worked for. One ex-McKinsey executive at
Apple struggled to foster a culture of debate on a team he inherited in
Japan. He had a bunch of gavels made up with “duty to dissent” written in
Japanese on them. If there wasn’t a robust enough argument in a meeting,
he’d slide the gavel across the table to someone, as a sign to take up the
opposite point of view. This simple prop was surprisingly effective.
Pause for emotion/exhaustion
There are times when people are just too tired, burnt out, or emotionally
charged up to engage in productive debate. It’s crucial to be aware of these
moments, because they rarely lead to good outcomes. Your job is to
intervene and call a time-out. If you don’t, people will make a decision so
that they can go home; or worse, a huge fight stemming from raw emotions
will break out. If you’ve gotten to know each person on your team well
enough, you’ll be sufficiently aware of everyone’s emotions and energies so
that you’ll know when it’s necessary to step in and defer the debate till
people are in a better frame of mind.
Use humor and have fun
The spirit with which a debate is launched often determines the tenor of
what follows. I have found that people on a team I lead key off my mood to
an almost alarming extent; when I find a way to have fun with a debate,
others often follow suit. In some cases, it might be simple humor or opening
the meeting with a good self-effacing story. What you say is less important
than the tone it conveys, and the mood it sets for what follows.
Finally, it’s important to be aware that not everyone enjoys debate.
Some people find the very act of debate aggressive and/or threatening. I
recall a time when we were developing a class at Apple on communication,
and I described my ideas on creating positive space for debate. Suddenly a
colleague next to me smiled and burst out, “Oh! You have been debating me

all this time just to make the class better. I thought you were just trying to
drive me crazy.” What to me had been an exciting opportunity to push each
other to hone and develop ideas had been to him an excruciating exercise in
one-upmanship. This drove home the importance of providing a clear
explanation up front about the purpose of debate and creating a positive
space in which it can occur—not to mention the importance of knowing the
people I was debating with well enough to recognize when I was driving
them nuts without meaning to!
Be clear when the debate will end
One of the reasons that people find debate stressful or annoying is that
often half the room expects a decision at the end of the meeting and the
other half wants to keep arguing in a follow-up meeting. One way to avoid
this tension is to separate debate meetings and decision meetings. Another
way to ease the anxiety of the people who want to know when the decision
will get made is to have a “decide by” date next to each item being debated.
Then at least they know when the debate will end and the decision will be
made.
I recommend setting up a weekly “big debate” meeting. In my staff
meeting we identified the most important debate each week, and who
needed to be involved (see “‘Big Debate’ Meetings” in chapter 8).
Don’t grab a decision just because the debate has gotten painful
It’s tempting to end debates and make a decision too soon when a debate
becomes too painful. You might be creeping up on a topic that’s been a
subject of great contention. At times like this, people often look to the boss
to end the suffering and make a decision. My instinct is to be a peacemaker,
or to get to a decision quickly. But a boss’s job is often to keep the debate
going rather than to resolve it with a decision. It’s the debates at work that
help individuals grow and help the team work better collectively to come up
with the best answer.

I once made a preemptive decision about what seemed like a small thing
—a seating chart—that ended badly. We didn’t even have cubes, just tables.
As the team grew from ten to sixty-five people, we eventually had to
rearrange the space and move everyone’s desk. Everybody had an opinion
about what the layout should be, and a young project manager volunteered
to herd the cats. They were hard to herd. The angst about who sat next to
whom and how far they were from a window went on for the better part of a
week. Frustrated, I came in on a Sunday and moved everyone’s desks
myself. The result was near mutiny on Monday morning. “We were this
close to a decision!” exclaimed the project manager. “And you just set us
back a week.” He was an unusually levelheaded person, but there were tears
of real frustration in his eyes.
The right thing to do would have been to set a “decide by” date, so
everybody would know that they couldn’t lobby the project manager
endlessly. If the debate seemed too rancorous, I could have asked him how I
could help. For example, I could have suggested the people whose
differences he was having a hard time reconciling try to wrap it up over a
meal or a walk, or that they switch roles and argue for each other’s
positions. But grabbing the decision away from him and making it myself
was not only overbearing; it simply didn’t work.

DECIDE
Push decisions into the facts, or pull the facts into the decisions, but keep ego out
YOU HAVE LINED up decisions and facts and shoved all ego—especially your

own—out of the way. Now is the time, as Twitter and Square CEO Jack
Dorsey put it, to “push the decisions into the facts.” Here is what I’ve
learned about what that means—how to help a team make the best possible
decisions—or to “always get it right.”
You’re not the decider (usually)

I once had an impromptu conversation with a woman on one of my
teams. At lunch one day, I asked her how it was going. She rocked back and
forth, clutching her head.
“What’s wrong?” I asked, alarmed.
“I thought I was hired for my brain, but I have not been allowed to use it
a single time since I got here! But Mark”—and here she winced visibly at
uttering her manager’s name—“makes all the decisions, even when he
doesn’t really understand the situation.”

I attended Mark’s next staff meeting, at which he was reviewing the
team’s quarterly OKRs (objectives and key results). As he flashed up the
first slide, I felt optimistic. I had taken the job only three weeks before so I
didn’t know much, but his plan looked great. The deck he’d built to explain
the goals for the quarter had everything I looked for: objectives that were
clear and ambitious, key results that were measurable.
Then I saw that the person sitting to my right was slouching a little in
her chair. Looking around the room, I registered arms crossed, faces stony,
and a silence so loud that it penetrated even Mark’s well-prepared speech.
Mark’s response was to speak even more animatedly and enthusiastically
about the OKRs. He finished up by telling me how proud he was of “his”
team. Clearly he meant to pay homage to them, but instead he sounded
belittling and patronizing. My skin started to crawl, so I could only imagine
how the people working for him felt.

“Any questions?” Mark concluded.
All hands and eyes were cast firmly downward, so I asked the room. “If
Mark hadn’t decided on these OKRs, what would you all have planned to
do next quarter?”
There was a collective exhale. Reluctantly, the young woman who’d
clutched her head at lunch spoke up. While Mark’s vision was inspiring, she
worried that it just wasn’t realistic. She calculated how much time it would
take to do what he was suggesting, and it became clear that everyone would
be working eighty-five hours a week. Others chimed in. He had badly
underestimated the lag time in a system that made work less efficient than it
should be. They’d been trying to fix it, but the problem was proving
intractable.
A conversation started. It seemed that, while Mark’s proposed goals
made sense in theory, his team knew that there were major obstacles that
made his plan impracticable. He had dismissed those obstacles as mere
“implementation details,” but, after listening to his team, it was clear that
he’d skipped the important steps of “listen,” “clarify, “debate,” and
“decide” and instead gone straight to “persuade” mode. It was pretty clear
to me that 1) his decisions were not grounded in the facts 2) even if his
decisions were the right ones, nobody was going to execute on them and 3)
he was in danger of losing his team, if he hadn’t already. I proposed that we
finish going around the table, just to hear everyone out. Then we could
regroup the following day.
This is a common mistake that is not limited to new managers. George
W. Bush famously said, “I am the decider.” Part of the reason it was so
funny was that he wasn’t in fact the decider, and he seemed to be the only
one who didn’t know it. If being elected as president of the United States
doesn’t grant you automatic decision-making power, becoming a manager
or even CEO of your start-up definitely doesn’t grant you “decider” status.
In his book A Primer on Decision Making, James March explains why
it’s a bad thing when the most “senior” people in a hierarchy are always the
deciders. What he calls “garbage can decision-making” occurs when the

people who happen to be around the table are the deciders rather than the
people with the best information. Unfortunately, most cultures tend to favor
either the most senior people or the people with the kinds of personalities
that insist on sitting around the table. The bad decisions that result are
among the biggest drivers of organizational mediocrity and employee
dissatisfaction.
That is why kick-ass bosses often do not decide themselves, but rather
create a clear decision-making process that empowers people closest to the
facts to make as many decisions as possible. Not only does that result in
better decisions, it results in better morale.
The decider should get facts, not recommendations
When collecting information for a decision, we are often tempted to ask
people for their recommendations—“What do you think we should do?”—
but as one executive I worked with at Apple explained to me, people tend to
put their egos into recommendations in a way that can lead to politics, and
thus worse decisions. So she recommended seeking “facts, not
recommendations.” Of course “facts” come inflected with each person’s
particular perspective or point of view, but they are less likely to become a
line in the sand than a recommendation is.
Go spelunking
As the boss, you do have the right to delve into any details that seem
interesting or important to you. You don’t have to stay “high level” all the
time. Sometimes you will be the decider. And even when you’ve delegated
the key decisions, you can still plunge into the details of some other,
smaller decision from time to time. You can’t do that for every decision, but
you can do it for some of them. I call this “spelunking” in your
organization, and it is a good way to find out what’s really going on. It’s
also a good way to put bosses and their direct reports on more equal footing
—to show that nothing is “above” or “below” anyone’s concern.

Also, when you are the decider, it’s really important to go to the source
of the facts. This is especially true when you’re a “manager of managers.”
You don’t want the “facts” to come to you through layers of management. If
you ever played the game “telephone” as a kid, you know what happens to
“facts” when they get passed around too many times.
In order to make sure they were able to understand and challenge facts
as presented, leaders at Apple were expected to know details many “layers”
deep in their organizations. If Steve Jobs was making an important decision
and wanted to understand some aspect of it more deeply, he’d go right to
the person working on it. There were numerous stories about relatively new,
young engineers who’d return from lunch to find Steve waiting in their
cube, eager to ask them about a specific detail of their work. He didn’t get
this information filtered to him through the person’s boss or through the
person’s boss’s recommendation; he went straight to the source. The more
often you can do that, the more empowered your whole organization feels.

PERSUADE
”Emotion. Credibility. Logic.”
—ARISTOTLE, RHETORIC
YOU’VE MANAGED TO drive your team to a decision, but there are still people

who don’t agree with it—the same people who will be responsible for
helping to implement it. If you’re working efficiently, not everybody on
your team is involved in every step of the listen-clarify-debate-decide
process for everything—just the relevant people. Now that a decision has
been reached, it’s time to get more people on board. This isn’t easy, and it’s
vital to get it right.
Persuasion at this stage can feel unnecessary and make the decider
resentful of people on the team who aren’t fully in agreement. The decider
has painstakingly gone through the listen, clarify, and debate steps and
made a decision. Why doesn’t everyone else get why it’s obvious we should
do this—or at least be willing to fall in line?

But expecting others to execute on a decision without being persuaded
that it’s the right thing to do is a recipe for terrible results. And don’t
imagine that you can step in and simply tell everyone to get in line behind a
decision, whether you have made it or somebody else has. Even explaining
the decision is not enough, because that addresses only the logic; you have
to address your listener’s emotions as well. And you must establish that the
decider, whether that’s you or somebody else on your team, has credibility
if you expect others to execute on the decision.
Authoritarian bosses tend to be particularly weak persuaders; they don’t
feel a need to explain the decision or their logic—“Just do it, don’t question
me!” And, because they usually don’t know or care how the people on the
broader team feel, they don’t address their emotions. They fail to establish
their credibility because they expect people to do what they say simply
because they’re the boss.
But even more democratic, open bosses often get so lost in explaining
the rationale for a decision that they forget how people must feel about it, or
vice versa. If you have done the basic work of Radical Candor—of getting
to know each of your direct reports personally and establishing a norm of
open exchange—it will be easier. But even then, being persuasive doesn’t
come naturally to a lot of people.
Many leaders I’ve worked with fail to be persuasive because they don’t
want to come across as manipulative, and the line between persuasion and
manipulation can be a fine one. Aristotle was troubled that so much rhetoric
and persuasion came down to manipulating people’s emotions. He thought

that there had to be a better way to get an idea across to a large number of
people who don’t have the time or knowledge to understand it completely.
He resolved this by explaining that to be legitimately persuasive a speaker
must address the audience’s emotions but also establish the credibility and
share the logic of the argument. These are the elements of persuasion that
have stood the test of time.
To help you be more persuasive, and to teach the “deciders” on your
team to be more persuasive, the rest of this section will cover, briefly,
Aristotle’s elements of rhetoric—pathos, logos, and ethos, which I’ll
translate loosely as emotion, logic, and credibility.7
Emotion
The listener’s emotions, not the speaker’s

You might have a strong emotional connection to a decision. It might be
that you see it leading to a change that is likely to help a large group of
people. But if you fail to take into account your listener’s emotions, too,
you won’t be persuasive.
I had a colleague named “Jason” who was responsible for making his
product usable for deaf people. He couldn’t have been more passionate
about his work—his mother was deaf—but he was unable to persuade the
engineering team to prioritize certain key features in time for launch. When
I showed him Aristotle’s framework, he exploded.
“I don’t know how I could have put any more emotion into my
arguments,” he said, his voice choked with frustration. He’d explained to
them his personal connection to the project. They’d seemed moved, but
they still hadn’t gotten it done.
“What were the emotions on the engineering team like?” I asked.
“Oh. They were just exhausted. They’d been pulling all-nighters for
weeks. It was like a death march over there.”
“What did you do to address their emotions?”
Jason smacked his forehead, seeing clearly now where he’d gone
wrong.

When Steve Jobs made his 2003 announcement that Apple would
launch iTunes for the Windows platform, he knew he was doing more than
just announcing a new product. For the Mac faithful, any accommodation to
Microsoft was nothing short of betrayal. The logic behind the decision to
launch iTunes for the Windows platform was sound: to win the music
industry, Apple had to be on the platform that had over 90 percent market
share—not just Mac, which had under 5 percent. But leading with this logic
only would have made the Mac faithful angrier. So instead he
acknowledged their incredulity and disbelief—with the headline “Hell froze
over”—and took their emotional response seriously by reassuring them that
Apple would remain true to its core.
Dick Costolo, when he was CEO of Twitter, was the master at
connecting with the emotions of “Tweeps,” people who work at Twitter. I
have scrutinized many employee engagement surveys. I thought it was
impossible to do better than Steve Jobs. Well over 90 percent of Apple
employees reported feeling positive about their CEO when I was at Apple.
But an even higher percentage of Tweeps felt positive about Dick as their
CEO.
Dick’s warm sense of humor helped him connect to people’s emotions
and earn their trust, which made him a persuasive leader. Dick often had
everyone at Twitter’s company all-hands meetings doubled over with
laughter, most especially with his unexpectedly candid responses to
somewhat hostile impromptu questions. I asked him how he came up with
these responses, and he replied, with a characteristic smile, “Unfortunately,
they just come to me.”
If you don’t happen to have experience as a stand-up comedian, you can
still borrow a page out of Dick’s book. He recommended several great
improv classes to other leaders in Silicon Valley, to help them find a way to
have fun answering all the awkward questions at all-hands meetings instead
of dreading them.
Credibility

Demonstrate expertise and humility

Credibility is one of those things that is hard to articulate but you know
it when you see it. Part of it is obviously knowing your subject and
demonstrating a track record of sound decisions. But it also requires a third
component—humility—which is sometimes in short supply.
Steve Jobs, not always thought of as a model of humility, had a knack
for inserting some “aw, shucks” elements into product announcements. For
example, at the 2010 iPad launch, Jobs started by saying, “We started Apple
in 1976. Thirty-four years later we just ended our holiday quarter … with
$15.6 billion of revenue. I don’t even believe that. Now what that means is
that Apple is an over-fifty-billion-dollar company. Now I like to forget that,
’cause that’s not how we think about Apple. But it is pretty amazing.”8
Behind him was an image of two geeks with a clunky box, a reminder of
Apple’s humble beginnings and the fact that Apple was driven by a zeal for
building products that could change the world, not just a desire for profit.
This added context allowed Jobs to point out that Apple had the expertise
and resources to create a whole new category of computer without losing
his audience. Note in particular the carefully chosen language in this
sentence: “Now I like to forget that, ’cause that’s not how we think about
Apple.” The “we” here is an important part of establishing humility for
himself and for the entire company.
But how do you establish your credibility if you don’t happen to be
Steve Jobs with a track record of so-called Schumpeterian change, or if
you’re so new that you don’t have much of a track record at all? Focus on
your expertise and past accomplishments. Be humble and invoke a “we” not
an “I” whenever possible. Bragging doesn’t work, but neither does false
humility. Don’t forget to establish your credibility or to help the deciders on
your team to establish theirs when it’s time for them to persuade others to
execute on a decision.
Logic
Show your work

Most people expect that the “logic” part of persuasion will be easiest,
since it doesn’t present the personal awkwardness of establishing credibility
or require the psychological finesse of addressing the collective emotions of
a group of people. And yet it contains its own traps. Sometimes, the logic
may seem self-evident to you, so you fail to share it with others. When you
know something deeply, it’s hard to remember that others don’t.
The good news is that you learned the secret to sharing your logic in
high school math class: show your work. When Steve Jobs had an idea, he
wouldn’t just describe the idea; he’d share how he got to it. He showed his
work. This signaled that if there was a flaw in his reasoning, he wanted to
know about it. And if there wasn’t, people would be more likely to accept
his idea. Showing his work was what strengthened his logic and ultimately
made him not only persuasive but “always getting it right.”

EXECUTE
Minimize the collaboration tax
AS THE BOSS, part of your job is to take a lot of the “collaboration tax” on

yourself so that your team can spend more time executing. The
responsibilities you have as a boss take up a tremendous amount of time.
One of the hardest things about being a boss is balancing these
responsibilities with the work you need to do personally in your area of
expertise.
Here are the three things I’ve learned about getting this balance right:
Don’t waste your team’s time; Keep the “dirt under your fingernails”; and
Block time to execute.
Don’t waste your team’s time
In four years of working for Sheryl, I can honestly say she never wasted
a single moment of my time, and in fact she saved enormous time for
everyone who worked for her. She expected us to come to our 1:1s with a
list of problems she could help us resolve. She’d listen, make sure she

understood, and then she was like a sapper, an explosives expert. She
defused some political situations that could have blown up in my face and
she dispensed with seemingly insurmountable obstacles. No unnecessary
meetings, no unnecessary analysis. She was never late to a meeting with
me, and she wouldn’t tolerate anyone being late to one of her meetings.
She’d make us have debates as a team, but just before they started to feel
tedious, she’d identify a “decider,” and ask that person to come back to the
rest of us with a decision by a particular date. She was one of the most
persuasive people I’ve ever met, and she taught those of us on her team to
be more persuasive as well. When some ridiculous time-wasting mandate
would come down from on high at Google, Sheryl would figure out a way
to shield us from it. All of that protection gave everyone who worked for
her a lot more time to execute. And when the results came in, they didn’t
escape Sheryl’s sharp analytical mind—we had to learn from what we’d
done, whether we succeeded or failed.

The reason why Sheryl’s teams were so productive was that she was
constantly putting us through our paces on the GSD wheel, but she was also
constantly clearing the decks for us so we could spend as much time as
possible getting stuff done.
Keep the “dirt under your fingernails”

Even though the burden of the collaboration tax falls on you as the boss,
the tax shouldn’t be 100 percent. In order to be a good partner to the people
on your team, and in order to keep the GSD wheel spinning efficiently, you
need to stay connected to the actual work that is being done—not just by
observing others executing but by executing yourself. If you become a
conductor, you need to keep playing your instrument. If you become a sales
manager, you need to keep going on sales calls yourself. If you manage a
team of plumbers, fix some faucets. Of course, you need to spend time
listening to people in 1:1s, leading debates, and so on. But you need to learn
to toggle between leading and executing personally. Don’t abandon the first
for the second; integrate the two. If you get too far away from the work
your team is doing, you won’t understand their ideas well enough to help
them clarify, to participate in debates, to know which decisions to push
them to make, to teach them to be more persuasive. The GSD wheel will
grind to a halt if you don’t understand intimately the “stuff” your team is
trying to get done.
Block time to execute
Often, execution is a solitary task. We use calendars mostly for
collaborative tasks—to schedule meetings, etc. One of your jobs as a
manager is to make sure that collaborative tasks don’t consume so much of
your time or your team’s time that there’s no time to execute whatever plan
has been decided on and accepted.

LEARN
“Consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.”
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON, SELF-RELIANCE
BY THE TIME you’ve reached this spot on the wheel, you and your team have

put in a ton of work, you’ve achieved something, and you want it to be
great. And it is human nature for us to become attached—often
unreasonably attached—to projects we’ve invested a lot of time and energy

into. It can take almost superhuman discipline to step back, acknowledge
when our results could be a lot better or are simply no good, and learn from
the experience.
Drew Houston, cofounder and CEO of Dropbox, is the most committed
and humble learner I’ve ever encountered in my career. The reason why
Dropbox has hundreds of millions of users is because the company, led by
Drew, has been relentless in making the product intuitive and easy to use.
Drew has been singularly willing to try things, admit they didn’t work as
well as he’d hoped, and pivot. Hard as it is to launch and iterate with your
company’s products, though, it’s much harder to do the same with one’s
self. But what really impressed me about Drew was that he is even more
relentless in reshaping himself as CEO than he is in improving upon the
product his company builds. Drew has probably read and reread every book
on management ever written. He has thought extremely deeply about what
kind of company he wants to build, and what kind of leader he wants to be.

In his book Denial, Richard Tedlow writes about dozens of painful
failures that have resulted when otherwise brilliant and successful people
refused to see, let alone admit to, their mistakes. A colleague of mine once
built a team that was getting absolutely terrible results, but he just couldn’t
admit it. Those of us who were trying to point it out to him were mystified.
When we finally got through to him, he exclaimed, “It’s unbearably painful
to admit it when you have an ugly baby!”

It’s obvious that good bosses learn from mistakes and successes alike
and keep improving. And yet, denial is actually the more common reaction
to imperfect execution than learning. Why is learning so rare? When
managing a large team, I found there were two enormous pressures that
tempted me to quit learning.
Pressure to be consistent
We are often told that changing our position makes us a “flip-flopper” or
“erratic” or “lacking principles.” I prefer John Maynard Keynes’s idea that
“When the facts change, I change my mind.”
The key, of course, is communication. Someone might reasonably
complain, “Just two months ago you convinced me of X and now you’re
telling me maybe not-X after all?” You obviously can’t change course like
this lightly, and if you do, you need to be able to explain clearly and
convincingly why things have changed. I’d often revisit the listen, clarify,
debate, and decide steps with an inner circle. When it was time to persuade
the broader team again after we’d reached a new conclusion, it was
important to take a deep breath and share, patiently and repeatedly, how
we’d gotten there, and to call out the change in direction explicitly.
Burnout
Sometimes we’re overwhelmed by our work and personal lives, and
these are the moments when it is hardest to learn from our results and to
start the whole cycle over again. That’s why you are at the very center of
the wheel that moves you forward as a manager. You’ve got to take care of
yourself, first and foremost. That’s easier said than done, of course.
Dick Costolo showed a remarkable ability to remain centered. While I
was his coach, the press took Dick on a hero-shithead roller-coaster ride the
likes of which I’ve never seen. Watching from the sidelines stressed me out
more than it stressed him out, even though he was at the center of the storm
and I was at a safe distance. After a particularly horrible day of bad press, I

woke up in the middle of the night after having a dream that the Twitter
office building was on a launchpad and that we were blasting into space
without our space suits. I woke my husband up with a shout and then
couldn’t go back to sleep. Dick told me he’d slept soundly through the
night.

When everybody was singing Dick’s praises as if he were the Second
Coming, he reacted with characteristic self-deprecating humor. Every
celebrity you could imagine was offering Dick invitations that most of us
would have given our eyeteeth to have, and he declined most to make sure
he could both focus on operations at Twitter and get home to have dinner
with his family. When everyone went on the attack, he quoted his daughter:
“Dad! Bad news and good news. Bad news: you’re on the Yahoo! Finance
list of five worst CEO’s this year. Good news: you’re number five.”
But Dick didn’t pretend that nothing was wrong, either. This was not
just a difficult time for him, it was a difficult time for Twitter. He gave a
talk to the company about the “mental toughness” required to remain
confident in the face of a barrage of bad press. I felt awkward as I got
weepy listening to him talk, but then I looked around and saw I was far
from alone. I think a lot of Dick’s mental toughness came from his ability to
stay centered, to do things like block two hours of think-time on his
calendar every day.

Chapter Five, the next chapter in this book, begins with some specific
things you can do to make sure you are staying centered, both at work and
in life.

PART II

TOOLS & TECHNIQUES
I hope Part I of this book has alleviated some of the fear, anxiety, and self-doubt that can be the
constant companion of any boss. Chapters One through Four explained the core ideas I learned
from twenty-five years of leading teams—from diamond cutters in Moscow, to Google, Apple,
and now at Candor, Inc. I wrote them because too many good people become bad bosses, and
bad bosses are a major source of unhappiness in our world and dysfunction in our workplace. I
hope that these ideas will help you find your own way to be a better boss, have more success at
work, and make the world a little happier.
Now you understand how building Radically Candid relationships with each of your direct
reports will help you guide your team to achieve results. And even though relationships don’t
scale, culture does. Your relationships and your responsibilities reinforce each other, and from
that interaction your success flows and your culture grows. But how to enact these principles?
What, exactly, do you do differently when you go to work tomorrow?

Part II of this book will describe some tools and techniques you can use to put the ideas from
Part I into place immediately. I’ve organized these chapters around the core ideas of the book,
not around what you should do first, second, third. Please read for understanding now. But rest
assured, the very last chapter will offer you the step-by-step set of things you can do to roll out
Radical Candor. There are few greater joys than doing work you love with people you care
about and achieving great results. That’s not a pipe dream. You can create that kind of
environment, and I’ll describe how.

5.
RELATIONSHIPS
An approach to establishing trust with your
direct reports
HOW DO YOU CREATE A climate in which Radically Candid relationships can

flourish? In this chapter, you will begin to see that your role as boss is far
more meaningful than the usual Dilbert stereotype. When I was at business
school, I was taught that my job as a manager was to “maximize
shareholder value.” In life, I learned that too much emphasis on shareholder
value actually destroys value, as well as morale. Instead, I learned to focus
first on staying centered myself, so that I could build real relationships with
each of the people who worked for me. Only when I was centered and my
relationships were strong could I fulfill my responsibilities as a manager to
guide my team to achieve the best results. Shareholder value is the result.
It’s not at the core, though.
As I’ve said before, there’s a chicken-and-egg interaction between your
relationships and your responsibilities. You can’t fulfill your responsibilities
without good relationships, but the way in which you fulfill your
responsibilities is integral to those relationships. They’re built from the
outside in and the inside out. This chapter will focus on inside out. Chapters
Six to Eight will focus on outside in. In this chapter I’ll talk about staying

centered, staying on an equal footing with the people who report to you, and
the art (and dangers) of socializing at work.

STAY CENTERED
You can’t give a damn about others if you don’t give a damn about yourself
IT MAY SEEM strange at first, but I always begin my efforts to coach CEOs in

building a Radically Candid workplace by looking first at how that person
has structured their life and is dealing with the pressures of their job. What
we bring to work depends on our own health and well-being. It’s a measure
of how far we’ve come as a society that this claim no longer feels overly
“soft.” And it’s a great boon to business, because managers who create a
stable foundation for themselves are invariably more effective at building
teams on which people can do the best work of their lives.

Think for a moment about hard times at work. You’re stressed out.
You’re not sleeping. Your problems at work and at home are compounding
each other. Hard times are made much harder when you’re not at your best.
And they can make it particularly hard to “care personally” about the
people you work with, not to mention those you live with. You’re too busy
dealing with your own suffering. But “caring personally” is integral to
building the relationships that drive everything else. The essence of
leadership is not getting overwhelmed by circumstances.

You can’t give a damn about others if you don’t take care of yourself.
And when you don’t care about yourself or those around you, everything
else—including your results—gets out of whack. But you already know
that. What am I recommending you do about it?
Work-life integration
Be relentlessly insistent on bringing your fullest and best self to work—
and taking it back home again. Don’t think of it as work-life balance, some
kind of zero-sum game where anything you put into your work robs your
life and anything you put into your life robs your work. Instead, think of it
as work-life integration. If you need to get eight hours of sleep to stay
centered, those hours are not something that you do for yourself at the
expense of your work or your team. Your work and your life can give each
other a “double bounce.” The time you spend at work can be an expression
of who you are as a human being, an enormous enrichment to your life, and
a boon to your friends and family.
Figure out your “recipe” to stay centered and stick to it
The world is full of advice here, and what is enormously meaningful for
one person is pure crap for another. I once saw a movie where a New York
cop was showing a Moscow cop the fish tanks and special lights and
elaborate meditation rituals he used to manage stress. “How do you cope?”
the New Yorker asked. The Muscovite replied with one word: “Vodka.”
Do whatever works for you. The key, I’ve found, is to prioritize doing it
(but not overdoing it) when times get tough. It’s even more important to
focus on making time for whatever keeps you centered when you are
stressed and busy than when things are relatively calm. A very successful
entrepreneur I knew went to the gym both before and after work during
crunch times.
Here’s what I need to do to stay centered: sleep eight hours, exercise for
forty-five minutes, and have both breakfast and dinner with my family. If I

skip one or two of those things for a day or two, it’s OK. But that’s the
routine. Also, every so often I need to read a novel (ideally one a week), go
away for a romantic weekend with my husband (ideally four times a year),
and take a two-week vacation with siblings and parents (once a year). If I
can manage to do those things, I can usually stay centered no matter what
storms are raging around me. If I can’t manage to do those things, I’ll
usually go a little nutty even if everything is pretty serene all around me.
Calendar
Put the things you need to do for yourself on your calendar, just as you
would an important meeting. If you are having trouble leaving the office in
time to get home for dinner, put your commute time in your calendar.
Pretend you have a train to catch.
Show up for yourself
Don’t blow off those meetings with yourself or let others schedule over
them any more than you would a meeting with your boss.

FREE AT WORK
OK, NOW YOU’RE centered and bringing your best self to work. The next step

is to think about how to give your team a sense of autonomy and agency so
that they, too, can be centered and bring their best selves to work. You can
guide your team to get results if you’ve built a trusting relationship with
each person reporting to you, and there can only be real trust when people
feel free at work. The first rule of building the kind of relationship with the
people that will make them feel free at work is to relinquish unilateral
authority. If you’re a manager at Google, it got laid down for you. If you’re
a manager at almost any other company, you’re going to have to relinquish
it voluntarily. That will take enormous discipline. It’s natural to crave a
little control. But power and control are illusory and won’t get you where

you really want to go. Relationships are more effective, and more
satisfying.
The basic premise here is that when everyone on your team is able to
bring the best of what they’ve got mentally, emotionally, and physically to
their work, they are more fulfilled in their jobs, they work better with one
another, and the team gets better results. You can’t get that out of people
with power, authority, or control. Twitter and Square CEO Jack Dorsey
explained why succinctly in an email he sent out to the whole company. “If
you have to use someone else’s name or authority to get a point across,
there is little merit to the point (you might not believe it yourself). If you
believe something to be correct, focus on showing your work to prove it.
Authority derives naturally from merit, not the other way around.”
If you can build a trusting relationship with people so that they feel free
at work, then they’re much more likely to do the best work of their lives.
But you’re not “getting it out of them”; you’re creating the conditions for
them to bring it out of themselves.
As discussed in Chapter One, there are few things more damaging to
building a trusting relationship with another person than unilateral authority
or a sense of superiority. The way you treat people determines whether
you’ll get their best effort, a perfunctory effort, or an effort to sabotage you.
When you treat people like cogs in a machine, you’ll get no more than you
demand, and you create an incentive to break the machine. I’ll never forget
the time I did a consulting project at a steel mill when I was in business
school. I designed what I thought was a very clever compensation system
that treated the workers as if they were “coin-operated.” The foreman said
to me, “With a system like that, guys who can’t write their names will learn
calculus to figure out how to screw me!” I realized he was exactly right.
Of course, the only thing worse than tyranny is anarchy, which is, as
Hobbes put it in Leviathan, “nasty, brutish, and short.” In anarchy, bullies
get away with optimizing for their narrow self-interest and the overall
results are often nonexistent. A Russian anecdote about the dictator and the
lawless warlord explains this perfectly. The warlord visits the home of the

dictator, who shows him the spectacular view outside his window. “You see
that road?” the dictator asks and then beats his chest. “Ten percent for me.
Ha ha ha ha!” When the dictator visits the warlord, the warlord has an even
more spectacular view to show off. “You see that road?” ask the warlord.
“What road?” asks the dictator. The warlord beats his chest. “One hundred
percent for me. Ha ha ha ha ha!” In a state of anarchy, the warlord’s
authority is even more unchecked than the dictator’s in a totalitarian regime.
Shona Brown, who wrote Competing on the Edge: Strategy as
Structured Chaos before she joined Google’s Executive Management Team
to lead Business Operations, wanted to avoid creating dictators or
permitting the rise of warlords. She carefully constructed a hiring process, a
promotion process, and a performance review process with this in mind. All
those processes were not to control employees. Rather, they were aimed at
replacing unilateral authority, which is easily hijacked by expediency or
narrow self-interest, with a process that required the input of the whole
team. By forcing managers to lay down unilateral control, Google
encouraged them to build good relationships with their direct reports and
ensured that everyone could feel free at work. It also dramatically improved
decision-making at Google.
Google’s distrust of unchecked managerial authority played out in
virtually all of its procedures. Managers couldn’t just hire people—they had
to put candidates through a rigorous interview process that then sent
“interview packets” all the way up to Larry Page to approve or disapprove.
Promotions were decided not by the managers but by a committee of peers.
Performance ratings were influenced by 360-degree feedback on each
employee, not just the manager’s subjective opinion, and then calibrated
across teams to make sure standards were similarly upheld across teams.
That made it pretty hard to play favorites or hold people back unfairly. And
so on.
Whether or not Google’s extreme approach would work for your
company, you can see how it gives people a sense of fairness and autonomy
simply by reducing the odds that any individual can be at the mercy of a

single person. Bosses can’t become petty bureaucrats. When you have too
much unilateral authority, you’ll inevitably do things that will erode trust,
ruin your relationships, and make your direct reports want to escape from
their jobs the way they’d want to break out of jail. Sometimes even just a
tiny bit of unilateral authority is enough to make people behave badly.
Think about your last trip to the Department of Motor Vehicles. That’s why
the first rule of building the kind of relationship with the people that will
make them feel free at work is to lay down unilateral authority.
Again, I’m not recommending abdication or anarchy. I’m not talking
about simply ignoring the people who report to you, or letting them do
whatever they want. You have a job to do. You have to guide your team to
achieve results, and to do that you’re going to have to break ties and make
tough decisions, often unpopular ones. That’s part of why building
relationships based on trust and in which people feel free at work is so
important.
I recommend that you look for places where you can let go of some of
the traditional sources of a boss’s control, thereby signaling to your reports
that you want them to be more autonomous. Much of the advice you’ll read
about in the next three chapters is aimed at encouraging you to give up your
unilateral authority and to focus instead on building trust-based
relationships.

MASTER THE ART OF SOCIALIZING AT WORK
SOME COMPANIES PUT a lot of effort into bringing employees together outside

of the office. It might be a happy hour, or a holiday party, or an off-site
event. While retreats and parties can be productive if people on your team
really want them, it is best to remember that mostly you get to know the
people you work with on the job, every day, as an integrated part of the
work rhythm, not at the annual holiday party.
Spending time with people from work in a more relaxed setting, without
the pressure of work deadlines, can be a good way to build relationships. It

doesn’t have to be expensive. You can take a walk together or have a picnic.
Meeting each other’s families can also have a big impact. More memorable
than the extravagant carnival set up at Google for “bring your kid to work”
day was the fact that Alan Eustace, a senior vice president of Engineering,
wore a pink bunny suit. Inviting your team and their families or
significant/insignificant others over to your home for a meal can be a great
way to open yourself up and show you care.
Sometimes, though, when these events are introduced by management,
they can feel both obligatory and forced—unintentionally undermining a
culture of freedom and autonomy. You already spend a lot of hours every
day with your colleagues and direct reports. Use that time to build
relationships. For the most part, it’s better to use the time after work to keep
yourself centered than to socialize with work colleagues.
When you do organize a social event at work, bear these warnings in
mind: even non-mandatory events can feel mandatory. And booze can land
you in dangerous territory.
Even non-mandatory events can feel mandatory
Fun events can be a good way to get to know the people on your team,
and to help them get to know one another. But be aware that if you organize
it, the social pressure will drag some people into situations they’d rather
avoid. I’ll never forget talking to Marissa Mayer when she was at Google
about a whale-watching trip that her boss had organized to help the team
bond. Marissa gets seasick. She knew she’d wind up blowing chunder over
the side of the boat if she went. But her boss pressured her, saying she
should go anyway, to be a good team player. You shouldn’t have to barf
over the side of a boat to demonstrate you’re a good team player.
It’s important to avoid those ironic moments when attempts to teambuild and improve morale actually make things worse. I once worked with a
leader whose team was working eighty hours a week. At their off-site
retreat, work-life balance was on the agenda—at 9 P.M. at night, after riding

go-carts. The truth was, they would all rather have skipped the go-carts, but
they thought they had to do “fun” things to “bond.” Sometimes, the greatest
gift you can give your team is to let them go home.
Booze
A drink or two can be a social lubricant. But it can also backfire, and
badly. Here are just a few of the nightmares that I have personally witnessed
or have firsthand knowledge of that were a result of too much alcohol at
work:
A woman vomited on her salad plate at a client dinner. A man punched
a police officer and spent the night in jail. An office couch had to be
removed because it was clear people had had sex on it. Another office
couch was ruined when somebody who was drunk vomited on it. A woman
drank so much that she passed out in the office, and her boss’s boss got a
call at 3 A.M. from security. Emotional agony and marriages destroyed by
unwanted drunken sexual advances. Rape allegations. A suicide attempt.
These are, needless to say, not good ways to build relationships.

RESPECT BOUNDARIES
BUILDING RADICALLY CANDID relationships requires you to walk a fine line

between respecting other people’s boundaries and encouraging them to
bring their whole selves to work. There is not one “right” place for these
boundaries to be or one way to push them open a little more. You’ll need to
negotiate boundaries differently with each person you work with. And
you’ve got to respect these boundaries while also getting to know the
people you work with better over time, in order to build the best
relationships of your career. Here are some things I’ve learned about
walking this line. I hope they will help you negotiate yours.
Building trust

Building trust in any relationship takes time because trust is built on a
consistent pattern of acting in good faith. It’s a big mistake to assume too
much trust too quickly (e.g., by prying into deeply personal questions when
you barely know a person). On the other hand, you do need to start
somewhere. If you never ask a single question about a person’s life, it’s
hard to move up on the “care personally” axis. Probably the most important
thing you can do to build trust is to spend a little time alone with each of
your direct reports on a regular basis. Holding regular 1:1s in which your
direct report sets the agenda and you ask questions is a good way to begin
building trust. (See “1:1 Conversations,” chapter eight.) The way you ask
for criticism and react when you get it goes a long way toward building
trust—or destroying it. (See “Soliciting Impromptu Guidance,” chapter six.)
Having annual “career conversations” is also an excellent way to strengthen
your relationship with each person who reports directly to you (see chapter
seven).
Sharing values
When I was working with the team developing Managing at Apple, a
number of people advocated strongly for starting the course with an
exercise that required managers to write down and share their “personal
values.” Their rationale was not bad. Your values are what keep you
centered. But I’m extremely wary of these kinds of exercises. First,
developing one’s personal values is the work of a lifetime. It can feel
cheapened by a forty-five-minute exercise. Second, while some people find
it helpful to articulate their values explicitly, others feel that it’s impossible
to do this in a meaningful way. Third, and most important, many people feel
that their values are a deeply private set of beliefs that they don’t want to
discuss with colleagues. Others may take the exercise as an invitation to
proselytize, and the way they talk about their values may highlight
differences that are actually irrelevant to their ability to work together. An

exercise that requires people to talk publicly about their values may drive a
wedge rather than help people find what they have in common.
Why would I object to asking people to write down their values since I
am all about “bringing your whole self to work” (i.e., feeling free enough to
pour everything you’ve got intellectually, emotionally, and physically into
your job)? A student in one of my classes once told a story that explained
why succinctly. He was a gay man from the Midwest, and he felt certain
that if he had come out in his previous job he would have been ostracized
by many of his colleagues. Doing a values exercise at that company,
therefore, might have required him to lie about his values.
The important thing to do is to stay in touch with your personal values,
and to demonstrate them in how you manage your team, not by writing
down things like “hard work,” “honesty,” and “innovation” on a piece of
paper. Live your values. Don’t try to list them like an HR exercise from the
show The Office.
Demonstrating openness
That brings me to an important precept at the heart of Radical Candor:
openness. You don’t have to share the same deeply personal values to build
good relationships at work; and it’s a terrible idea to try to convince your
colleagues that your values are “right” and theirs are “wrong.” But you do
need to respect other people’s values when they do share them with you.
You might imagine that in liberal places like San Francisco, where I
work, or New York, people are wide open to difference. But I’ve had
several colleagues who’ve complained that they have to keep their
conservative political views to themselves or face ostracism here in San
Francisco. They have to bite their tongue whenever people make comments
that take for granted that they agree all conservatives are stupid or venal.
Think about it—whether it’s the gay man forced to weather anti-gay jokes
or the conservative forced to weather anti-conservative jokes, the result is

the same—some part of them is negated, and they can’t help feeling
alienated, not free at work.
That’s why it’s crucial to remind people that an important part of
Radically Candid relationships is opening yourself to the possibility of
connecting with people who have different worldviews or whose lives
involve behavior that you don’t understand or that may even conflict with a
core belief of yours. It’s possible to care personally about a person who
disagrees with your views on abortion or guns or God. The fastest path to
artificial relationships at work, and to the gravitational pull of
organizational mediocrity, is to insist that everyone have the same
worldview before building relationships with them. A radically candid
relationship starts with the basic respect and common decency that every
human being owes each other, regardless of worldview. Once again, the
work is the bond everybody on a team does share, and the most productive
way to strengthen that bond is by learning how to work together in ways
that benefit everyone involved.
Dick Costolo spent a lot of time and effort thinking about how to make
Twitter a more inclusive, open environment. When he took the Implicit
Association Test (IAT) that measures unconscious bias, his scores revealed
him to have essentially no unconscious bias. Per the IAT he’s less genderbiased than I am, and I consider myself a real champion for women.
One of my favorite stories about Dick and diversity was his effort to
eliminate the phrase “you guys” from his vocabulary. I told him a story
about my twins—one a boy and one a girl—who were in kindergarten. Both
of their teachers were speculating why boys raise their hands more often
than girls. Then I attended a class and heard the questions: “OK, you guys,
who knows what four plus one is?” No wonder the girls weren’t raising
their hands! Children are literal, and girls are not guys. I told Dick that
story, and confessed that I’m literal too and feel annoyed whenever
somebody addresses a mixed group as “guys,” or “you guys.” Most people
look crossways at me when I launch into my “you guys” diatribe, but Dick
smacked his forehead. “Of course! There’s nothing worse than being

invisible. I can’t believe I never thought of that! There’s no worse way to
make a group of people feel excluded than to use language that pretends
they are simply not in the room.”
“Yes, like Invisible Man,” I said. Dick and I had recently discussed
Ralph Ellison’s novel about an African-American man whose color renders
him invisible.
“Yes, exactly! OK, you’ve convinced me. I’m going to start saying you
all!” Dick said.
It’s not easy to change your reflexive idiom, but Dick spent real energy
training himself to say “you all” instead of “you guys.”
Physical space
Is touching a colleague ever a good idea? A lot of people would say any
sort of physical contact at work other than a super-professional handshake
is inappropriate or dangerous. I think we’ve thrown the baby out with the
bathwater on this one. When a colleague’s spouse has been killed in a car
accident or an employee has just announced their engagement, a superprofessional handshake just doesn’t cut it, and real hug may be the world’s
most effective way to show you care personally.
Stacy Brown-Philpot, TaskRabbit’s CEO, learned a lot about hugging—
and navigating physical space—from much-loved Silicon Valley coach Bill
Campbell. The first time Stacy ever met Bill was when he came up to her
after a talk and told her that she flapped her hands in front of her face when
she spoke and that she would have more credibility if she’d stop it. She said
it was the most useful public speaking advice she’s ever gotten.
“Were you a little mad that this man you’d never met before came up
and criticized you?” I asked her.
Stacy thought about it for a moment. “Well, no I wasn’t. Because before
he said anything to me he gave me a great big bear hug and a kiss on the
cheek. So I knew he was coming from a place of warmth. It was
immediately obvious that he cared and was just saying it to help me.”

“Were you weirded out that a strange man hugged and kissed you?”
“No, because it seemed just so natural coming from him. I wish more
people would hug like that.”
My husband, who coached Bill’s son’s Little League team, said, “He
hugged all the coaches and all the parents and all the kids. He just hugged
everybody! More people should do that.”
Like Stacy and my husband, I wish more people gave hugs like that. Not
just little one-arm side swipes, but the kind of six-second hugs that
Gretchen Rubin writes about in The Happiness Project. Gretchen, who has
research for EVERYTHING, explains why a longer hug is more effective
than a shorter one.
“Interesting fact: to be most effective at optimizing the flow of the chemicals oxytocin and
serotonin—which boost mood and promote bonding—hold a hug for at least six seconds.”

Of course, a hug or a touch can go wrong. Early in my career, I had a
boss who gave me a big hug when I was upset about something, and then
started grinding into me in a sexual and most unwelcome way. Now I was
really upset. I had relied on him as a mentor and now I would forever see
him as just another sleazebag. If a hug is sexual or belittling or obviously
unwanted, it’s obnoxiously aggressive. If all you ever give is hugs and you
never challenge the other person, then your hugs may be ruinously
empathetic. Conversely, don’t feel bad when the other person doesn’t want
to be hugged. And if you are not comfortable with a hug, it’s OK too. When
Russ Laraway read these pages, he immediately asked me not to hug him.
To show that you “care personally” with your hugs, you have to obey
the “platinum rule.” The “golden rule” says do unto others as you’d have
them do unto you. The “platinum rule” says, figure out what makes the
other person comfortable, and do that. If most people on your team are
comfortable with hugs but a couple are not, you need to figure out a way to
make sure that they don’t feel excluded from all those hugs they don’t want.
Use your words!)

But if you can do what Bill Campbell did for Stacy, and offer the kind
of Radically Candid hug that opens a person’s mind and heart to learning
something new, or to growing in some way, you’ll leave the world just a
little bit happier.
Go ahead. Try it. I dare you! It’s fine to push yourself past your comfort
zone, but not fine to make others uncomfortable, so try it only with people
who want to be hugged!
Recognizing your own emotions
“I know what kind of day I’m gonna have by the kind of mood you’re in
when you walk in the door,” Russ told me one morning when we worked
together at Google. I’ve rarely felt so ashamed. I thought I was pretty evenkeeled and that I had a good poker face during tough times. He saw I was
upset and gave me some credit without backing off his direct challenge:
“You at least try not to take it out on us. But still, we all notice what kind of
mood you’re in. Everybody notices what kind of mood the boss is in. We
have to. It’s adaptive.”
What did I need to do to make sure that my whole team didn’t have a
worse day just because I was having a bad one? It’s here that the imperative
to bring your whole self to work can collide with the negative impacts of
doing just that. But repressing those feelings tends not to work, either. You
can’t successfully hide how you feel from people who work closely with
you. You don’t want to take your bad days out on your team, but nor can
you hide the fact you’re not at your best. The best you can do is to own up
to how you feel and what’s going on in the rest of your life, so others don’t
feel your mood is their fault.
I learned simply to say something along the lines of, “Hey, I’m having a
shitty day. I’m trying hard not to be grouchy, but if it seems like I have a
short fuse today, I do. It’s not because of you or your work, though. It’s
because I had a big argument with a friend [or whatever].”

If you have a truly terrible emotional upset in your life, stay home for a
day. You don’t want to spread it around any more than you’d want to spread
a bad virus around the office, and emotions are just as contagious as germs.
Mental-health days should be taken more seriously than they are.
Master your reactions to others’ emotions
Many people cross a dangerous emotional boundary when they become
the boss. They try to manage other people’s emotions. This is a big
overstep. All people, including the people who report to you, are
responsible for their own emotional lives. There are fewer faster paths to
Manipulative Insincerity than imagining you can control another person’s
emotional reactions or maneuver around them. To build Radically Candid
relationships, do not try to prevent, control, or manage other people’s
emotions. Do acknowledge them and react compassionately when emotions
run high. And do try to master your reactions to other people’s emotions.
You already know how to react to emotion with compassion. You do it
all the time in your personal life. Somehow, at work we are primed to forget
these basics. Here are some pointers on reacting with compassion—things
you probably do instinctively with other relationships but may not be doing
at work:
Acknowledge emotions. Emotional reactions can offer important clues to help

you better understand what’s really going on with the people you manage.
They can offer you a shortcut to the heart of the matter. So don’t respond to
outbursts or sullen silences by pretending they are not happening. Don’t try
to mitigate them by saying things like, “It’s not personal,” or “Let’s be
professional.” Instead say, “I can see you’re mad/frustrated/elated/____”
Ask questions. When somebody is frustrated or angry or upset enough

about a situation at work that they react emotionally, this is your cue to keep
asking questions until you understand what the real issue is. Don’t overdirect the conversation; just keep listening and it will become clear.

Adding your guilt to other people’s difficult emotions doesn’t make them feel better.

People I’ve managed or coached have often come to me distraught after
they gave guidance to somebody who started crying. “What should I have
done differently?” they ask. Maybe they handled the situation perfectly. Just
because somebody is crying or yelling doesn’t mean you’ve done anything
wrong; it just means they are upset. If you feel guilty about the fact that
they are upset, you’re more likely to have a defensive reaction than a
compassionate one. Your defensive reaction can lead you, in turn, to
unintentionally patronizing or cold behavior. People spend a huge portion of
their lives at work. They generally care about their work. Of course they get
upset when things go wrong. When somebody is upset, it’s not necessarily
your fault. Their upset may have nothing to do with you. Focus on them,
not on yourself.
Here are some of the most
counterproductive words you can utter: “Don’t be sad”; “Don’t be mad”;
“No offense, but.” If you’re tempted to use these phrases, think about that
Meatloaf song, “I want you, I need you, there ain’t no way I’m ever gonna
love you, now don’t be sad.” That just makes it sadder! If you’re a person
who can’t bear emotion, don’t put the burden on the other person not to cry
or yell or get defensive. If you tell somebody they can’t have a particular
emotional reaction, it becomes almost inevitable they will have that
reaction; your injunction is likely to elicit the very emotions you most fear.
It’s like Tolstoy’s brother telling him he couldn’t leave the corner of the
room until he quit thinking about a white bear. The white bear occupied
Tolstoy’s mind for hours. I once had a boss who told me I couldn’t cry in
front of him. So I cried all the damn time with that man! It was terrible for
both of us.
Telling other people how to feel will backfire.

If you really can’t handle emotional outbursts, forgive yourself. You don’t have to sit

there watching somebody cry or yell if it’s unbearable for you. If somebody
starts to have an emotional reaction you can’t deal with, it’s fine to say, “I

am sorry you’re upset. I’m going to step out for a moment and get you
some water. I’ll be right back.” Then, when you get back, you can say, “I’d
like to change the topic for now and discuss this later. I promise I’ll come
back to it, because I can see it’s important. But I’m having a hard time right
now.”
Keep tissues a short walk away from your desk. I used to keep a box of tissues in

my office in case of tears. Then a person I worked with made a habit of
coming into my office and crying every Friday afternoon. This was an
exhausting way to end the week. I went to a colleague who was deathly
afraid of tears for advice. He pointed out to me that offering a Kleenex at
the first sign of tears sometimes can really turn on the waterworks. If he
saw somebody start to tear up, he’d excuse himself to leave the office and
go get Kleenex. That little respite was often enough to allow the crier to
regain composure. I tried this technique the next Friday, and it worked!
Keep some closed bottles of water at your desk. Another good piece of advice I

heard from an HR business partner was to have some unopened bottles of
water at hand. If you see that somebody is getting upset, offer a bottle of
water. Often, the simple pause to unscrew the top and take a sip of water is
enough to help the person feel calmer. If you are a crier, you can use the
bottle of water!
Walk, don’t sit. When planning a difficult conversation, try taking a walk

instead of sitting and talking. When you’re walking, the emotions are less
on display and less likely to start resonating in a destructive way. Also,
walking and looking in the same direction often feels more collaborative
than sitting across a table and staring each other down.
* * *

your direct reports takes time and real
energy. Sometimes, especially when things are not going well, this will be
BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS WITH

the most depleting part of your job. Remembering that it is central to your
job will help. And if you can power through these times, you may find as I
have that these relationships give your work meaning far beyond the results
that you achieve together.

6.
GUIDANCE
Ideas for getting/giving/ encouraging praise
& criticism
IN CHAPTER TWO, I DESCRIBED how Radically Candid relationships create the

trust that enables you to give better guidance and how giving better
guidance in turn further develops those Radically Candid relationships.
Guidance is the “atomic building block” of management, but it is
profoundly uncomfortable for most people. What follows are specific tools
and techniques that will make it easier for you to create a culture of
guidance on your team.

In order to build a culture of Radically Candid guidance you need to get,
give, and encourage both praise and criticism. The graphic I developed to
help keep the balance right is shown on the previous page.

SOLICITING IMPROMPTU GUIDANCE
Embrace the discomfort
ONE OF THE key insights I received about creating a culture of guidance

came from watching the argument between Larry Page and Matt Cutts that I
described in the Introduction. Before Larry criticized Matt’s proposal, he
encouraged Matt to challenge with gusto by grinning encouragingly when
Matt started to get passionate. Larry never said, “Don’t get emotional.” The
more intense Matt’s criticism got, the wider Larry’s grin got. How can you
foster an environment in which this becomes unremarkable? What are the
things you can do to get criticism from your team?

It’s not so easy, because when you are the boss people really do not
want to criticize you or to tell you what they really think. Along with the
position, you inherit a bunch of assumptions that have nothing to do with
who you really are. The role often changes people’s impression of you in
ways that can be bewildering. For example, I am five feet tall, have blonde
hair, and speak with a Southern accent. All my life I’d fought the “dumb
blonde” stereotype. So when I became a manager and somebody told me I
was intimidating, I thought she was joking. Then, I overheard somebody
else describe me as tall. Even though one guy on the team was seventeen
inches taller than I am.
Don’t think for a minute that because you’re a nice person, or because
you used to eat lunch every day with the people you now manage, that
people won’t see you differently now that you’re the boss, or that they will
automatically trust you. Take a look at the many colorful definitions of boss
like this one in Urban Dictionary: “Bosses are like diapers: Full of shit and

all over your ass.” “Boss: Disingenuous form of address used by insolent
little twats, which although ostensibly deferential, actually implies that they
don’t actually have any respect for you at all.” To some degree, the minute
you assume the role of boss you’ll be fighting preconceptions. And the
authority that comes with the role is, in fact, likely to bring out some of
your worst instincts—so it may not just be a matter of unfair perception!
That’s why when you become the boss it’s important to work so hard to
earn your team’s trust. You may be worried about earning their respect, and
that’s natural. Unfortunately, though, being overly focused on respect can
backfire because it’ll make you feel extra defensive when criticized. If, on
the other hand, you can listen to the criticism and react well to it, both trust
and respect will follow.
Here are some tips/techniques I’ve seen work to get the conversation
flowing:
You are the exception to the “criticize in private” rule of thumb. Michelle Peluso,

CEO of Gilt Groupe, explained the benefits of criticizing herself publicly.
In an interview with The New York Times she said, “I’ve always taken a
slightly different approach with 360 reviews. We’ll share them with each
other on the executive team, and I’ll start with mine—‘Here is where I’m
good, and here is where I’m not doing so well.’ I’ll even tell the whole
company and say, ‘Here is where I want your help.’ That makes it a bit
safer for other people to do the same, and you can build trust.”
Once I figured out who on my team was most comfortable criticizing
me, I would ask that person to do it in front of others at a staff meeting or
an all-hands meeting. They were always reluctant at first—“What about
‘criticize in private’?” But when you are the boss, that rule doesn’t apply to
you. When you encourage people to criticize you publicly, you get the
chance to show your team that you really, genuinely want the criticism. You
also set an ideal for the team as a whole: everyone should embrace criticism
that helps us do our jobs better. The bigger the team, the more leverage you
get out of reacting well to criticism in public.

Also, the bigger your team, the harder it is for people to get on your
calendar. If you have more than sixty or so people working for you and you
make them wait till they can get a private moment with you to share some
criticism, you’ll probably never hear it. Airing it in public has another
benefit as well: it saves you from having to hear the same thing over and
over.
Too many managers fear that public challenge will undermine their
authority. It’s natural to want to repress dissent, but a good reaction to
public criticism can be the very thing that establishes your credibility as a
strong leader, and will help you build a culture of guidance.
Have a go-to question. When you’re the boss, it’s awkward to ask your direct

reports to tell you frankly what they think of your performance—even more
awkward for them than it is for you. To help, I adopted a go-to question that
Fred Kofman, author of Conscious Business and my coach at Google,
suggested. “Is there anything I could do or stop doing that would make it
easier to work with me?” If those words don’t fall easily off your tongue,
find words that do. Of course, you’re not really just looking for one thing;
that opening question is just designed to get things moving.
Embrace the discomfort. Most people will initially respond to your question

with something along the lines of “Oh, everything is fine, thank you for
asking,” and hope that’s the end of the conversation. They probably didn’t
see your question coming, and so they feel immediately wary. Their
discomfort will make you feel uncomfortable, and you may find yourself
reassuring them by nodding and offering an “I’m glad to hear that.” Don’t
do this. It’s essential that you prepare yourself for these scenarios in
advance and commit to sticking with the conversation until you have a
genuine response.
One technique is to count to six before saying anything else, forcing
them to endure the silence. The goal is not to be a bully but to insist on a
candid discussion—to make it harder for the person to say nothing than to

tell you what they’re thinking. If they can’t come up with anything on the
spot, you can always arrange a time to meet again. If counting to six doesn’t
do the trick, ask the question again. And again if necessary. One of the
bankers who led Facebook’s IPO told me about a time that Sheryl asked
him for feedback after a meeting with potential investors. “What could I
have done better?” she asked him. He couldn’t think of anything. The
presentation had been a home run. Sheryl wouldn’t let him off the hook,
though. “I know there was something I could have done better in there.” He
still couldn’t think of anything. Now, he was getting nervous. “You have a
reputation for being great at giving feedback,” Sheryl encouraged him. “I
bet if you think about it you can come up with something.” Now, he was
sweating. But still she didn’t let him off the hook. She smiled expectantly,
and stayed silent. That was when he finally thought of something, and told
her. “Thank you!” She said. “I’ll do better next time!”
Another way to embrace the discomfort is to point out when people’s
body language is at odds with what they’re saying. Imagine you’re at a
meeting with a colleague with whom you’ve just shared a big, possibly
impractical idea. He responds, “Oh! Great idea,” but you notice that he
hunches over and crosses his arms defensively. Ignoring that sort of
nonverbal cue is a lost opportunity. Without being obnoxious, try saying
something like, “Then why are you folding your arms and hunching down
in your seat? Come on, tell me what you’re really thinking!”
Listen with the intent to understand, not to respond. You’ve finally gotten the

other person to offer some criticism. Once again, you have to manage your
response. Whatever you do, don’t start criticizing the criticism. Don’t start
telling the other person they weren’t Radically Candid! Instead, try to repeat
what the person said to make sure you’ve understood it, rather than
defending yourself against the criticism that you’ve just heard. Listen to and
clarify the criticism—but don’t debate it. Try saying, “So what I hear you
saying is…” If you find my language too programmatic, find another way
to say it.

If you’re not one of those people who instinctively welcomes criticism
as an opportunity to improve, you’ll of course feel a strong urge to act
defensively—or at the least to explain yourself. This is a natural response,
but it pretty much kills any chance that you’ll get the person to offer you the
gift of candor again. So don’t feel bad that you are having this very normal
human reaction. Manage your feelings rather than letting them manage you.
Remind yourself going in that no matter how unfair the criticism, your first
job is to listen with the intent to understand, not to defend yourself.
Reward criticism to get more of it. Once you’ve asked your question and

embraced the discomfort and understood the criticism, you have to follow
up by showing that you really did welcome it. You have to reward the
candor if you want to get more of it. If you agree with the criticism, make a
change as soon as possible. If the necessary change will take time, do
something visible to show you’re trying. For example, my cofounder Russ
once complained that I interrupted him. It was true; I am an inveterate
interrupter. I tried not to do it, but I knew I wouldn’t succeed in eradicating
this bad habit just because he’d mentioned it. Telling Russ that I couldn’t
help myself was hardly a good way to reward his candor. So I said, “I know,
it’s a problem. Can I ask you to help me stop interrupting?” I pulled a fat,
blue rubber band out of my drawer and put it around my wrist. I asked him
to snap the rubber band every time I interrupted him. Russ thought this was
funny, and agreed. I wore the rubber band, which I now think of as my
“radical bander,” to my staff meeting. I asked everyone present to help me
by snapping it. Sure enough, others started snapping the rubber band. Then,
I mentioned it at an all-hands meeting. Additional snapping did help me
interrupt less. But equally important was that it sent a strong signal that I
had heard the criticism and was taking action, and that I wanted to hear
more criticism.
In some cases, of course, you may disagree with the criticism. It’s here
that your Radical Candor skills become essential. It is never enough to
simply acknowledge the other person’s feelings—that invariably feels

passive-aggressive and insincere. Instead, first, find something in the
criticism you can agree with, to signal that you’re open to criticism. Then,
check for understanding—repeat what you heard back to the person to make
sure you got it. Then, let them know you want to think about what they
said, and schedule a time to talk about it again. It’s essential that you do get
back to it. The key then is to explain exactly why you disagree. If you can’t
make a change, giving the employee a thoughtful, respectful explanation of
why not, is the best reward you can offer for their Radical Candor.
Sometimes they’ll come around, sometimes not. Sometimes they may even
spot flaws in your reasoning that causes you to reconsider. Or the reward
for their candor might have to be a full explanation of why you disagree, an
openness which invites them to poke some more at your logic, and a clear
idea of when it’s time to stop arguing and commit.
Gauge the guidance you get. Try keeping a tally. How many times each week

do the people reporting to you criticize you? How often do they praise you?
If it’s all praise and no criticism, beware! You’re having smoke blown up
your rear end. You need to work harder to get them to criticize you. Try
teaching the people on your team about the idea of Radical Candor. Explain
why you don’t want them to be ruinously empathetic or manipulatively
insincere with you. Tell them you’d welcome Radical Candor, but you’d
prefer Obnoxious Aggression to silence. Print out the Radical Candor
framework, and when you’re having a conversation and you feel like
somebody is pulling their punches, point to Radical Candor and ask them to
go there. If keeping a tally or printing out frameworks seems tedious to you,
try the Candor Gauge we built to help with this. (www.radicalcandor.com/).

ORANGE BOX
Make it not just safe but natural to criticize you
JOHNSON & JOHNSON’S ORIGINAL credo had an interesting line: “Employees

should have an organized system for suggestions and complaints.” When it
got rewritten, this intention got watered down into a much vaguer and less

useful statement: “Employees must feel free to make suggestions and
complaints.” If you’re the boss, you have to do much better than announce
how employees “must” feel. Employees won’t feel free if you don’t take
specific actions to ensure that it’s not just safe but expected to make
suggestions and complaints. You have to organize a system. But it needn’t
be elaborate.
Michael Dearing, who defined product marketing at eBay in 2002 and is
now the CEO of the successful seed-stage fund Harrison Metal, used a
simple but effective technique for getting people to criticize him. He put an
orange box with a slit on the top in a high-traffic area so that people could
drop questions or feedback into it. At his all-hands meeting he’d reach into
the box and answer off the cuff. A good friend of mine, Ann Poletti, who
used to work on Michael’s team, said that no matter how banal the question,
he was “always amazingly respectful and took on each question
thoughtfully.”

Here’s how Ann described it: “Taking Q&A with a team of 200-plus
when the business was very turbulent and eBay was in the midst of
switching CEOs … must have worn him out—he’s an introvert. I know he
hated doing it, but he never seemed annoyed or impatient, in fact he made it
look like he enjoyed the questions.” By proving to the team that he would
fix problems when people pointed them out rather than shoot the
messenger, Michael eventually built a culture where people would
challenge him directly. Over time the orange box emptied out. When people
had an issue, they would stand up and ask direct questions, or simply drop
by his cube.

MANAGEMENT “FIX-IT” WEEKS
ENGINEERING ORGANIZATIONS OFTEN do the equivalent of spring cleaning.

Everyone will stop working on new features for a week and fix bugs in the
current product. Engineering teams are constantly tracking and evaluating
bugs, so that they have a prioritized list to tackle when the so-called “fix-it”
week comes around. A bug fix-it week is sort of the opposite of a Hack
Week; instead of a chance to work on new and exciting ideas people usually
don’t have time to get to, it’s a chance to fix old and annoying problems that
have been bothering people for months. It’s like cleaning out the utensil
drawer into which you spilled a little honey three months ago but somehow
never found the moment to take all the knives and forks out to scrub the
bottom of the drawer properly. Fix-it weeks can be deeply satisfying in a
totally different way from hack weeks.

At some point, a team at Google decided that it would be good hygiene
to have regular management fix-it weeks. (Later, another team did a similar
thing but called it “bureaucracy busters.”) Here’s how it worked: a system
was created where people could log annoying management issues. If, for
example, it took too long to get expense reports approved, you could file a
management “bug.” And you could do the same if performance reviews
always seemed to take place at the worst possible time of year, or if the last
employee survey took too long to fill out, or if the promotion system
seemed unfair, and so on.
The management bug tracking system was public, so people could vote
to set priorities. Somebody was assigned the job of reading through them all
and grouping duplicates. Then, during management fix-it week, managers

would have bugs assigned to them. They’d cancel all regularly scheduled
activities (or most of them) and focus on fixing the management issues that
were most annoying to the organization.

GIVING IMPROMPTU GUIDANCE
SO FAR WE’VE dealt with getting your team to give you feedback. I put that

first because I wanted to emphasize that it has to be a two-way street. But in
fact, it starts with you. If you don’t have the courage to give Radically
Candid guidance, the people who report to you won’t believe you really
want to get it from them, so you won’t hear about it when your team thinks
you’re veering off course. And if you don’t lead by example, the people on
your team are unlikely to guide each other.

Be humble
I start with being humble because it’s absolutely essential when
delivering both praise and criticism. We’re all naturally defensive when first
criticized, but if you deliver criticism humbly, it breaks down the natural
resistance to what you’re saying. Being humble is just as important when
delivering praise. Otherwise, you sound patronizing or dishonest.
Furthermore, a common concern that people raise about giving feedback is
“What if I’m wrong?” My answer is that you may very well be wrong. And
telling somebody what you think gives them the opportunity to tell you if
you are. A huge part of what makes giving guidance so valuable is that
misperceptions on both sides of the equation get corrected.
Here are some techniques I’ve found helpful to make sure I’m being
humble when giving praise and criticism:

The Center for Creative Leadership, an
executive-education company, developed a technique called “situation
behavior impact” to help leaders be more precise and therefore less arrogant
when giving feedback. This simple technique reminds you to describe three
things when giving feedback: 1) the situation you saw, 2) the behavior (i.e.,
what the person did, either good or bad), and 3) the impact you observed.
This helps you avoid making judgments about the person’s intelligence,
common sense, innate goodness, or other personal attributes. When you
pass blanket judgments, your guidance sounds arrogant.
A simple example from everyday life: instead of yelling, “You asshole!”
when somebody grabs your parking space, try saying, “I’ve been waiting
for that spot here for five minutes, and you just zipped in front of me and
took it. Now I’m going to be late.” If you say this, you give the person a
chance to say, “Oh, I’m sorry I didn’t realize, let me move.” Of course, the
person might also just flip you off and say, “Tough shit.” Then you can yell
with more justification, “You asshole!” :)
Situation, behavior, and impact applies to praise as well as to criticism.
Praise can feel just as arrogant as criticism. When somebody says, “You’re
a genius,” it begs a question: “Who are you to judge my intelligence?”
When somebody says, “I’m so proud of you!” it’s natural to think, “Who
are you to be proud of me?” Better to say, “In your presentation at this
morning’s meeting (situation), the way you talked about our decision to
diversify (behavior) was persuasive because you showed everyone you’d
heard the other point of view (impact).”
It’s the fear of sounding arrogant or patronizing that sometimes makes
me hesitate to give praise to people properly. Using these three touchstones
helps.
Situation, behavior, impact.

Left-hand column. Chris Argyris, a professor at Harvard Business School,

and Donald Schön, a professor of philosophy and urban planning,
developed an exercise called the “left-hand column.” This method also

helps leaders avoid letting arrogant snap judgments seep out into their
guidance.
Here’s how it works. Think of a conversation you had that was
frustrating. Take out a clean sheet of paper and draw a line down the
middle. Write down what you actually said in the right-hand column. Write
down what you thought in the left-hand column. Now think about when the
conversation went sideways. Did what you think spill out into what you
said? The point is not just to say whatever is in your left-hand column; it’s
to have the humility to question what you’re thinking—“Is Sally really
hoarding information, or did she just forget to tell me?” “Is Sam really
unreliable, or did I just not define the requirements clearly enough?”
“Ontological Humility.” Fred Kofman argues for the importance of reflecting

your core values in the way you work. His book Conscious Business
includes a chapter titled “Ontological Humility,” which reminds us not to
confuse objective reality with our subjective experience. He explains by
quoting his daughter: “Broccoli is yucky. That’s why I don’t like it.” This is
funny in a three-year-old, but when adults confuse subjective tastes with
objective reality, it’s arrogant. “He is an idiot. That’s why he’s wrong.” The
idea is that when you are mindful that your subjective experience is not
objective truth, it can help you challenge others in a way that invites a
reciprocal challenge.
Be helpful
It’s obvious that being helpful is a great way to show that you care
personally, and that the whole point of challenging directly is to be helpful.
Still, it’s hard to do. You’re really busy, and besides, you don’t have all
the answers—you’re humble, right? The good news is that being helpful
doesn’t mean you have to be omniscient or do everybody else’s work for
them. It just means you have to find a way to help them clarify the
challenge they’re facing—that clarity is a gift that will enable them to move
forward. Here are some tips and reminders:

Stating your intention to be helpful can lower defenses. When you tell somebody

that you aren’t trying to bust their chops—that you really want to help—it
can go a long way toward making them receptive to what you’re saying.
Try a little preamble. For example, in your own words, say something like,
“I’m going to describe a problem I see; I may be wrong, and if I am I hope
you’ll tell me; if I’m not I hope my bringing it up will help you fix it.”
Show, don’t tell. It’s the best advice I’ve ever gotten for story-telling, but it

also applies to guidance. The more clearly you show exactly what is good
or bad, the more helpful your guidance will be. Often you’ll be tempted not
to describe the details because they are so painful. You want to spare the
person the pain and yourself the awkwardness of uttering the words out
loud. But retreating to abstractions is a prime example of Ruinous Empathy.
Further, it can actually unintentionally signal that the behavior in question
was so bad/shameful that you can’t even talk about it, thereby making it
hard for the person to move on. I once had to say, “When we were in that
meeting and you passed a note to Catherine that said ‘Check out Elliot
picking his nose—I think he just nicked his brain,’ Elliot wound up seeing
it. It pissed him off unnecessarily, made it harder for you to work together,
and was the single biggest contributing factor to our being late on this
project.” The whole situation was so ridiculous that it was tempting just to
say, “What you did in the meeting was juvenile.” But that wouldn’t have
been as clear or as helpful.
And again, the same principle goes for praise. Don’t say, “She is really
smart.” Say, “She just gave the clearest explanation I’ve ever heard of why
users don’t like that feature.” By explicitly describing what was good or
what was bad, you are helping a person do more of what’s good and less of
what’s bad—and to see the difference.
Finding help is better than offering it yourself. When Sheryl Sandberg offered to

get me a speaking coach, she did have to budget for it, but she didn’t have

to sit there watching me practice presentations for hours. It took some of
her time but not too much.
You won’t always be so lucky to have the budget for coaches that Sheryl
had at Google. But more often than not you will have a colleague or
acquaintance who can help. All you have to do is to make the introduction
and help your direct report structure the conversation.
Guidance is a gift, not a whip or a carrot. It took me a long time to learn that

sometimes the only help I had to offer was the conversation itself. Adopting
the mindset that guidance is a gift will ensure that your guidance is helpful
even when you can’t offer actual assistance, solutions, or an introduction to
someone who can help. Don’t let the fact that you can’t offer a solution
make you reluctant to offer guidance. Think about times that guidance has
been most helpful to you, and offer it in that spirit.
Give feedback immediately
Giving guidance as quickly and as informally as possible is an essential
part of Radical Candor, but it takes discipline—both because of our natural
inclination to delay/avoid confrontation and because our days are busy
enough as it is. But this is one of those cases where the difference in terms
of time spent and impact is huge. Delay at your peril!
If you wait too long to give guidance, everything about it gets harder.
You know how it is when you kick things down the road—you notice a
problem and note that you need to deal with it, but you don’t take the time
to write it down. Then it occurs to you, and you need to sit and remember
what precisely the problem was. Then you need to remember to schedule
the meeting. You’re beginning to need a list of the things you’ve intended to
say but haven’t. And then before the meeting, you need to find time to
remember what’s on the list of random things you’ve been intending to say
but failing to jot down. The list of things won’t really hang together—you
will no longer be able to remember clear examples of the problem—so you
won’t be able to use the “situation behavior impact” model, and you’ll end

up with a confused, frustrated colleague. What, exactly, are you criticizing?
Putting criticism off is simply daunting and exhausting. It’s much more
effective and less burdensome to just say it right away!
Of course, there are times when you should wait to praise or criticize
somebody. Generally, if either you or the other person is hungry, angry, or
tired, or for some other reason not in a good frame of mind, it’s better to
wait. However, this is the exception not the rule, and too often we use the
exception as an excuse not to do what we know we should do. Finally, there
is a difference between saying it right away and nitpicking. If it’s not
important, don’t say it right away or at all.
Say it in 2–3 minutes between meetings. Just saying it right away in a minute or

two, three at most, will take less time than scheduling a meeting for later, let
alone having it—and it won’t stick around in your mind, worrying you at
odd moments. When I teach classes on Radical Candor, the single most
common question people ask is, “How do I find the time?” At first, I took
this as a sign that they hadn’t bought my argument about how important
guidance was. But after more conversations, I realized that people actually
don’t believe it can be quick. They think it’s an hour-long conversation they
need to schedule. They think giving good guidance is going to add hours of
meetings to each week. They think of it like a root canal. Try thinking of it
as brushing your teeth instead. Don’t write it in your calendar; just do it
consistently, and maybe you won’t ever have to get a root canal.
So let me reiterate: impromptu guidance really, truly is something you
can squeeze in between meetings in three minutes or less. If you give it
right away in between meetings, you will not only save yourself a
subsequent meeting but also deliver the guidance in less time than it would
take you to schedule the subsequent meeting. And the quality of your
guidance will be much better. The best guidance I’ve gotten in my life
generally happened in super-quick conversations on the fly, like my
exchange with Sheryl. If you have five direct reports and you want to offer
each praise three times a week and criticism once a week, this is far more

impromptu feedback than most managers offer. And it will just take you a
maximum of sixty minutes per week—all those minutes grabbed from the
time you’d otherwise spend just walking between meetings. But doing it
does require energy and consciousness.
Keep slack time in your calendar, or be willing to be late. Prioritizing something

generally means making time in your calendar for it. But how do you make
time in your calendar for something that is “impromptu”? You can’t. Better
to talk to the person right away. But in order for that to happen, you must do
one of two things. One, keep slack time in your calendar, either by not
scheduling back-to-back meetings or by having twenty-five- and fiftyminute meetings with hard stops, not thirty- and sixty-minute meetings. Or,
simply be willing to be late to your next meeting.
Don’t “save up” guidance for a 1:1 or a performance review. One of the funniest

things about becoming a boss is that it causes an awful lot of people to
forget everything they know about how to relate to other people. If you
have a beef with somebody in your personal life, it would never occur to
you to wait for a formally scheduled meeting to tell them. Yet, management
has been bureaucratized to the point that we throw away effective strategies
of everyday communication. Don’t let the formal processes—the 1:1
meetings, annual or biannual performance reviews, or employee happiness
surveys—take over. They are meant to reinforce, not substitute, what we do
every day. You’d never let the fact that you go to the dentist for a cleaning a
couple times a year prevent you from brushing your teeth every day. Don’t
use performance reviews as an excuse not to give impromptu in-person
feedback.
Guidance has a short half-life. If you wait to tell somebody for a week or a

quarter, the incident is so far in the past that they can’t fix the problem or
build on the success.

Unspoken criticism explodes like a dirty bomb. Just as in your personal life,

remaining silent at work for too long about something that angers or
frustrates you makes it more likely that you will eventually blow up in a
way that makes you look irrational, harms your relationship, or both. Don’t
let this happen to you. Unless you feel you’re in a rage, just say what you’re
thinking right away!
Avoid black holes. Be sure to let people know immediately how their work

is being received. If you ask somebody to do work to help you prepare for a
meeting or a presentation where that person won’t be present, be sure to let
them know the reaction to their work. If you don’t, the person who did the
work feels as if their efforts have gone into a black hole. It is important to
pass on both praise and criticism for the contributions they made. Better, of
course, is to let people present their own work whenever possible so they
can get guidance first-hand. Even at nonhierarchical Google, praise from
my boss always meant more to the people working for me than guidance
from me.
In person (if possible)
Remember, the clarity of your guidance gets measured at the other
person’s ear, not at your mouth. That’s why it’s best to deliver guidance in
person. You won’t really know if the other person understood what you
were saying if you can’t see the reaction. If you don’t know whether what
you said was clear to the other person, you may as well not have said it.
And most communication is nonverbal. When you see a person’s body
language and facial expression, you can adjust how you are delivering the
message so they can best hear it. It is far easier to tell if the other person
understood you clearly when you can look into their eyes, notice if they are
fidgeting, folding their arms, etc.
Often the reason why you’ll be tempted not to deliver guidance in
person is that you are trying to avoid seeing the other person’s emotional
reaction. This is natural. But the quality of your guidance will improve if

you’re present for these feelings. If somebody is upset, this gives you an
opportunity to show compassion—to go up on the “care personally”
dimension of the Radical Candor framework. The emotional response of the
other person will help you better understand how your message landed, and
to adjust. When somebody is blowing you off (as I did Sheryl when she first
told me I said “um” a lot), you know you have to go further on the
“challenge directly” dimension of the Radical Candor framework. But when
someone is upset or angry, focus on showing that you care personally, don’t
let the emotions knock you off your good intention to challenge directly.
Unfortunately, giving guidance in person is not always possible. When
that is the case, here are some things to keep in mind:
Immediate vs. in person. If the person is in another city and giving guidance

in person means waiting more than a few days, then optimize for
immediacy unless what you’re talking about is a big deal. (Don’t fire
somebody via text.) If the person is down the hall, and doing it in person
means just taking a little walk, then get off your butt!
Hierarchy of modes. A video call, if you have high-speed internet access, is

second best. If the connection is spotty, use phone for voice and video as a
bonus, muting your computer. Phone is third best. Email and text should be
avoided if at all possible. It always feels faster to fire off an email or text,
but when I think about all the times I had to spend hours clearing up a
misunderstanding that arose from an email that was misunderstood, I realize
that it’s actually faster to walk down the hall or if the person is remote pick
up the phone.
Multiple modes. I found that praising people at a public all-hands meeting

was a great way to share significant accomplishments. However, I often
found that following up in person at a 1:1 carried more emotional weight,
and following up with an email to the whole team carried more lasting
weight.

Reply All do’s and don’ts. If you must criticize or correct somebody over

email, do not Reply All. Never. Even if there’s a small factual error that
went out to a lot of people, reply just to the person who made the factual
error and ask that person to Reply All. For praise on small things, I found
that a quick Reply All email worked pretty well. This kind of praise takes
only a moment, and it shows that you are noticing and appreciating what’s
going on around you. If you can remember to mention it in person when
you pass the person in the hallway or walk by their desk, so much the better.
But don’t let perfection be the enemy of the good.
Being in a remote office is hard. If you are in a remote office, or if you are

managing people in remote offices, it’s really important to have quick,
frequent interactions. This will allow you to pick up on people’s most subtle
emotional cues. I learned this from Maurice Tempelsman, my boss when I
lived in Russia. He made a point of calling me every day from New York, if
only for a three-minute check-in call. He had operations in Africa in the
1970s and had learned the importance of frequent communication to pick
up on emotional cues from people in far-flung locations. In fact, he claimed
he could sense a person’s mood even when phone calls were impossible and
he had to rely on telex—but only if he got in the habit of telexing daily.
(Telex was the technology used in between the telegraph and the fax
machine.)
Praise in public, criticize in private
A good rule of thumb for guidance is praise in public, criticize in
private. Public criticism tends to trigger a defensive reaction and make it
much harder for a person to accept they’ve made a mistake and to learn
from it. Public praise tends to lend more weight to the praise, and it
encourages others to emulate whatever was great. However, this is a rule of
thumb, not a hard and fast rule. Here are some things to think about.

Corrections, factual observations, disagreements, and debates are different from criticism.

It’s vital to be able to correct somebody’s work, to make a factual
observation, or to have a debate in public. But criticizing a person should be
done in private—“There’s a typo on slide six,” or “There are a lot of typos
in this presentation, and given the nature of our work we need to be 100
percent accurate,” or “There are a bunch of typos here but they don’t matter
too much at this stage,” or “You missed your number by 5 percent,” or “I
disagree with what you just said.” Those kinds of corrections could go out
over email or be said in a public meeting. Here is an example of criticizing
the person: “When you give several important presentations that are all
riddled with typos that a simple spell-checker would catch, I start to wonder
what’s going on. Can you explain?” That sort of thing needs to be a private
conversation.
Adapt to an individual’s preferences. While the majority of people do like to be

praised in public, for some any kind of public mention is cruel and unusual
punishment. When you’re praising people, your goal is to let them know
what they did well as clearly as possible and in the way that will make them
feel best—not the way you’d like to hear it. When you care personally
about each individual working for you, when you’ve taken the time to get to
know each person, being aware of these preferences is natural.
Group learning. I’ve rarely encountered anyone who will admit that they

like to be praised publicly. So whenever I praised in public I would explain
that I wasn’t doing so because the person wanted public praise, but so that
everybody could learn from what had happened. Something like, “Not
because I want to embarrass Jane, but to make sure all of you learn from
what she did, I’m going to tell you what she just accomplished, and how
she did it.” When I wanted to encourage public criticism so that everyone
learns from one another’s mistakes, I’d let it be self-reported. (See
“Whoops the Monkey” later in this chapter.)

Don’t personalize
There is a big difference between caring personally and personalizing
when giving praise and criticism. Caring personally is good. Personalizing
is bad. Here are some tips that can help you avoid personalizing but accept
it when people take what you say personally:
The “fundamental attribution error” will harm the effectiveness of your guidance. This

phrase was coined by Lee Ross, a social psychologist from Stanford. We’ve
touched on this already, but it’s useful to repeat because it is so central to
healthy human relationships, whether with spouses, children, friends, or the
people who report to you. Making a fundamental attribution error is using
perceived personality attributes—“You’re stupid, lazy, greedy, hypocritical,
an asshole,” etc.—to explain someone else’s behavior rather than
considering one’s own behavior and/or the situational factors that were
probably the real cause of the other person’s behavior. It’s a problem
because 1) it’s generally inaccurate and 2) it renders an otherwise solvable
problem really hard to fix since changing core personality attributes is so
very difficult and time-consuming. In the story I told in chapter two the
problem with the AdSense policy was not that Larry was greedy; it was that
I didn’t understand his proposal. But it was so much easier and more
satisfying in the moment to just accuse Larry of being greedy. Try to catch
yourself when you think or say, “You are ____.” Use situation, behavior,
impact, or the left-hand column techniques to be humble and to avoid
personalizing.
Say “that’s wrong” not “you’re wrong.” I once worked with a Radically Candid

guy who had an unfair reputation for being an a-hole. Once people got to
know him well, they realized he wasn’t a jerk, he was just super intense; in
fact, he cared as deeply about his colleagues as he did about the quality of
the work they did together. His work was so good that the short-term
impression he made didn’t stop him from being successful. But the fact that
he rubbed people the wrong way often created a lot of unnecessary stress

for both him and his team. I moved from New York to California, and I lost
touch with him for a few years. Then I happened to meet somebody who’d
just joined his team. I braced myself for a request for advice about how to
work with him, but all I heard was, “Oh, he’s such a great guy! I love
working with him. He has a reputation for being one of the most supportive
people at our company.” I called up my friend to pass along the
compliment, and to ask how he’d pulled this off. He told me that a simple
suggestion had helped him turn things around. What was it? He stopped
saying, “You’re wrong,” and instead learned to say, “I think that’s wrong.”
“I think” was humbler, and saying “that” instead of “you” didn’t
personalize. People started to be more receptive to his criticism.
All too often, an argument over something simple—“Should we go left
or go right? Should we put the button at the top or at the bottom?”—
becomes a contest of egos: “You are a moron! You are an arrogant jerk!”
When an argument is about an issue, keep it about the issue. Personalizing
unnecessarily will only make the issue harder to resolve.
The phrase “don’t take it personally” is worse than useless. I’ve warned against

personalizing, but even when you take the steps outlined above—even
when you don’t personalize—feedback is personal for the person receiving
it. Most of us pour more time and energy into our work than anything else
in our lives. Work is a part of who we are, and so it is personal. Thus when
you try to soften the blow by saying, “Don’t take it personally,” you are in
effect negating those feelings. It’s like saying, “Don’t be sad,” or “Don’t be
mad.” Part of your job as a boss (and as a human being) is to acknowledge
and deal with emotional responses, not to dismiss or avoid them.
How not to personalize even when it really is personal. It’s easier to understand

how to avoid personalizing guidance when you’re talking about a person’s
work. But when you’re talking about something that is more personal, it’s
even harder. One woman I worked with had body odor to the point that it
undermined her effectiveness. But how to raise the issue? I tried hard to

make the conversation about her colleagues’ noses, not her armpits. She
wasn’t American, but we were working in the U.S., so I laughed a little bit
about American culture. I tried not to be prescriptive about the solution—
maybe she had an allergic reaction to deodorant, or a health concern—but I
did make clear that the status quo was undermining her otherwise strong
performance. She looked embarrassed, but she fixed the problem. Five
years later, she wrote me a note thanking me. A manager now, facing a
similar situation, she finally understood how hard raising the issue must
have been for me. But she had also noticed a remarkable increase in
people’s willingness to work with her once she addressed the body odor
problem. So she knew how important it was to overcome her own
reluctance, and find a way to explain the problem to the person reporting to
her.

GAUGE YOUR IMPROMPTU GUIDANCE, GET A BASELINE,
TRACK YOUR IMPROVEMENTS
I’VE EMPHASIZED THAT Radical Candor gets measured at the listener’s ear, not

at the speaker’s mouth. But how is a speaker to know what’s going on in the
listener’s ear? Do you really have to get guidance on your guidance? The
bad news is, yes. The good news is that it can take fifteen seconds.

Visual cues that make you aware of when you’re moving toward
Radical Candor or away from it are invaluable. One of the most effective
ways to become more Radically Candid is to explain the framework to your
team and then ask them to gauge your guidance each week. Track your

progress over time. Are you moving toward Radical Candor, or away from
it?
A low-tech way to do this is to put a copy of the framework near your
desk. Leave some stickers by it—one color for praise, another for criticism.
Ask people to put stickers in the quadrant they feel best describes your most
recent interactions. If somebody feels you were unnecessarily harsh, they
should put a criticism sticker in the Obnoxious Aggression quadrant. If they
feel you pulled your punches, they’ll put a criticism sticker in the Ruinous
Empathy quadrant. If they feel you dished out too many meaningless “atta
boy”s or “good job”s or “I’m so proud of you”s just to make them feel
better, they’ll put a praise sticker in the Ruinous Empathy quadrant. If they
feel you told them they did a good job but then told somebody else they did
a bad job, then they put a praise sticker in the Manipulative Insincerity
quadrant.

One problem with the paper and stickers approach is that when one
person sees how others have gauged your feedback, it’s likely to influence
them unduly. They pile on. Also, it’s awkward for people to walk by your
desk or office to do it. And peeling stickers loses its novelty pretty quickly.
People won’t wander by your desk to put a sticker on a piece of paper
consistently. Naturally, there’s an app to solve those problems:) You can
find it at radicalcandor.com.
Whether you use paper and stickers or the app, asking your team to
gauge your guidance will help make Radically Candid guidance feel more
natural. (I saw this play out at Apple, where we printed out a version of the

Radical Candor framework on beautiful cardstock, and many managers put
it up near their desks.)
One, it exposes people daily to the Radical Candor framework. That
helps them understand that when you’re challenging them, you’re doing it
because you care, not because you’re a jerk who wants to make their lives
miserable. Two, when you have a shared vocabulary, colleagues are likely
to ask you to be Radically Candid, which makes getting over the “if you
don’t have anything nice to say don’t anything at all” syndrome much
easier. Three, the visual cue is a reminder that will help push you to be
Radically Candid when the heat of the moment is pulling you in a different
direction. In my experience, most bosses fear being jerks but employees
fear their bosses are not shooting straight. When a boss sees clearly that the
employee wants to hear it straight, it’s much easier to say it straight. Four, if
you ask them to do this but they don’t, or if they submit ratings
anonymously in the app, you’ve got a good signal that they don’t trust you
to react well. You’ll need to start proving to your team that you won’t
punish them if they criticize you. You need to go back and work on
soliciting Radically Candid guidance.
For example, if you saw that a number of people were tagging both your
praise and your criticism in the Ruinous Empathy quadrant, you’d know
that you were not challenging people directly enough with your praise or
your criticism. You’d need to focus on giving praise that is more specific
and more sincere and to “just say it” when criticizing people. It’s scary the
first time you try it. But the vast majority of people I’ve coached have been
pleasantly surprised. They gear up to just say it, expecting the worst kinds
of emotional reactions, and then the person thanks them. After that happens,
Radical Candor becomes easier.
The transition from Ruinous Empathy to Radical Candor may be a
direct path, and relatively comfortable. When people move directly over to
Radical Candor, the transition will feel good right away. But sometimes
people have to overcorrect to get it right. They must go from Ruinous
Empathy toward the very quadrant they fear most—Obnoxious Aggression

—before they can achieve Radical Candor. Since the main reason people
are being ruinously empathetic in the first place is that they hate to feel like
a jerk, that can result in a transition that feels scary. If that’s you, don’t
despair. You’re actually moving in the right direction. But certainly don’t
stop here—push on up to Radical Candor!
Getting from Ruinous Empathy to Radical Candor requires changing
behavior, and that is never easy. But the good news is that it’s like brushing
your teeth. If you weren’t taught as a child to brush your teeth, adopting the
habit would take some effort, even though it only takes a couple of minutes
twice a day. Once you’re used to brushing your teeth, though, not brushing
your teeth feels gross. You can’t bear to go to sleep or leave the house in the
morning if you haven’t brushed.
And even when you do give guidance, you’ll have good weeks and bad
weeks. There are going to be times when you are overwhelmed or distracted
by things at home, and Ruinous Empathy and/or Obnoxious Aggression
will take over. You won’t always be 100 percent sincere. Guidance is hard,
and there will always be pressure on you not to be Radically Candid. You
can’t “fix” yourself once and for all; you have to manage yourself, daily.
Getting a signal from others about whether you are moving toward or away
from Radical Candor will really help.
Getting a gauge report can be painful for people when they are in the
Manipulative Insincerity or Obnoxious Aggression quadrants. It can also be
motivating, though, since very few people actually want to be a
manipulative or obnoxious.
Getting a “Ruinous Empathy” gauge report is also painful, though it’s
especially effective. Getting a reminder that challenging directly is actually
kind can have a big impact on behavior quickly. It’s not that hard to “just
say it” with criticism and “be specific” with praise. Since the majority of
management mistakes happen in the Ruinous Empathy quadrant, gauging
guidance can quickly improve quantity and quality of guidance that people
get, and move you and your whole culture toward Radical Candor. If we
can move from Ruinous Empathy to Radical Candor more often, the world

will be not only more productive but happier. Obnoxious Aggression leads
to more success than Ruinous Empathy but is also extremely unpleasant.
The most important thing is figuring out how others experience your
guidance. Listen to how they feel about the guidance you’re giving them.
Help them understand that when you’re challenging them it’s because you
care about not just their professional growth but them as human beings. A
regular visual prompt that shows you where your guidance is landing from
other people’s perspective can really help.

BEING RADICALLY CANDID WITH YOUR BOSS
IN A TALK I gave recently I said that when you are the boss, it is not just your

job but your moral obligation to be Radically Candid. A couple days later,
somebody who’d watched the talk Tweeted me: “Tried Radical Candor on
my boss. Got Fired.” I felt terrible and offered to help him find another job.
He assured me it was all for the best and he already had a few other options.
Nevertheless, let me clarify. If you are not in a position of authority, I do
recommend that you try being Radically Candid—but proceed with caution.
It is not your moral obligation to criticize your boss if it will cost you your
job. If you find you cannot be Radically Candid with your boss, I
recommend that you consider finding a new job with a new boss. But do it
on your own terms. Don’t get fired. Protect yourself.
How can you practice safe Radical Candor with your boss? Do you have
to get permission to start trying it? Not surprisingly, since I believe that
unilateral authority doesn’t work, I’d say no. Take the initiative on your
own. Once you start rolling out Radical Candor with your team and seeing
good results, explain what you’re doing and why to your boss. Give your
boss a chance to challenge you, but assume good intent. If you get some
positive signals, try getting and then giving some guidance.
Happily, you can approach Radical Candor with your boss in much the
same way you did with your team. Start by asking for guidance before you
give it. You want to make sure you understand the other person’s

perspective before you start dishing out praise or criticism, no matter who
the person is—your boss, your employee, your peer, or anyone else in your
life. When you get the guidance, don’t offer a critique of the criticism, and
don’t accept bland praise; focus on rewarding the candor if you get it and on
embracing the discomfort if you don’t. If your boss is already rolling out
Radical Candor and is explicitly asking you to gauge their feedback, that’s
an exception to the don’t-critique-the-criticism rule of thumb. If your boss
is being ruinously empathetic, and asks to be gauged, gauge with candor.
Next—and here is a slight modification if you’re talking to your boss
instead of your employee—ask permission to give guidance. Say something
like, “Would it be helpful if I told you what I thought of X?” If your boss
says no, or that’s not your job, let it drop and polish up your résumé! If your
boss says yes, start with something pretty small and benign and see how
they react. If they react well and reward the candor, keep going. If they
don’t, give up immediately or assume ill intent. Try again, carefully, but if
you get the same reaction the next time, it may be time to move on. You
deserve a better boss.
When offering guidance to your boss, use the same tips above: be
helpful, humble, do it immediately and in person, praise in public (if it
doesn’t look like kissing up), criticize in private, and don’t personalize.
The ability to be Radically Candid with your boss is crucial to your
success. One of the most difficult things about being a middle manager—
and, since most CEO’s report to a Board of Directors, pretty much all
managers are middle managers—is that you often wind up responsible for
executing decisions that you disagree with. This can feel like a Catch-22. If
you tell your team you do agree with the decisions, you feel like a liar—or
at the very least, inauthentic. If you tell your team that you don’t agree with
the decisions, you look weak, insubordinate, or both.
Radical Candor is the way out of this dilemma. If you are able to tell
your boss that you disagree with a decision, then at least you can have
conversations that will allow you to better understand the rationale behind
it. And once you understand the rationale more deeply, you can explain it to

your team—even if you don’t agree with it. When they ask, “Why are we
doing this, it makes no sense to us, didn’t you argue?” you can reply, “I
understand your perspective. Yes, I did have an opportunity to argue. Here’s
what I said. And here is what I learned about why we are doing what we are
doing.” If they insist on knowing whether you agree, you can tell them in
all honesty that your boss listened to your point of view, that you were
given an opportunity to challenge the decisions, and that now it’s time to
commit to a different course of action than the one you were arguing for.
Andy Grove had a mantra at Intel that we borrowed to describe leadership
at Apple: Listen, Challenge, Commit. A strong leader has the humility to
listen, the confidence to challenge, and the wisdom to know when to quit
arguing and to get on board.

GENDER AND GUIDANCE
guidance harder to give for both men and
women, but in very different ways. Both bias and what I call “gender
politics” can foil efforts to be Radically Candid with someone of a different
gender. I’m focusing on gender here because this book is rooted in my firsthand experiences and I’m a Caucasian woman. But there are important
parallels in race, and any instance where relationships cross group
boundaries.
GENDER DIFFERENCES MAKE

Why Radical Candor may be harder for men managing women
Most men are trained from birth to be “gentler” with women than with
men. Sometimes this can be very bad for the women who work for them.
The most sexist man I ever worked for was invariably far more reluctant to
criticize me than the men who worked for him. He lived in mortal fear of
making me cry. He made plenty of men who worked for him cry, but that
didn’t seem to register with him. I’d be willing to bet that women don’t
actually cry more often than men at work. I’ve never seen data on this, but
in my experience, men cry too, and just about as often. But, nevertheless,

this boss was afraid to criticize the women on his team because he was sure
we’d cry, and I felt he looked down on us with arrogance and pity as a
result.
I don’t want to be too harsh here. Lots of men are more reluctant to
criticize the women who report to them than the men, and most of them are
not misogynists. If you find you have this reluctance, don’t beat yourself
up. Just remember, if you’re a boss, it’s your job to manage your fear of
tears and not pull your punches when criticizing women. Criticism is a gift,
and you need to give it in equal measure to your male and female direct
reports.
Gender politics is another factor that makes it harder for some men to be
Radically Candid with women. I was recently talking to a physics professor
whose student didn’t know the quadratic equation. (I don’t remember it
from high school algebra either, but I’m not majoring in physics.) Stunned,
and wondering how she’d gotten this far with such a gaping hole in her
knowledge, the professor told her she needed to learn it immediately.
Furious at the criticism, she slammed him in his rating as a teacher.
This didn’t start out as a gender issue. The initial problem was that this
young person, like so many others, was unused to criticism—a phenomenon
explored well in an Atlantic article titled “The Coddling of the American
Mind.” But the professor’s colleagues—some of them well-meaning men
trying to be sensitive to gender issues—allowed the rift to become a gender
question. Suddenly, telling a student majoring in physics that she needed to
learn the quadratic equation became a risky thing for professors at this
institution to do.
This situation was not only bad for the student who resisted what she
needed to know to succeed, but also for all the female students this
professor taught after her. Understandably, he became more hesitant to
criticize the work of his female students than of his male students. And yet
to grow in their field these young women, like their male counterparts,
needed his criticism. The situation wasn’t much fun for the professor, either.

This scenario illustrates an anti-guidance trend that’s creating a perfect
storm in higher education—and blowing through all companies where
millennials are working today. But if teachers and bosses become wary of
exposing students or employees to facts that might be perceived as
“threatening” or “disturbing” due to their fear of reprisals, both schools and
companies are in trouble. Combine that with gender politics, and learning
takes a real hit. Will the tone of the current “campus conversation” (or lack
thereof) backfire and reduce mentorship and learning for women?
The strange case of the quadratic equation is extreme, but milder
examples happen every day. And not just with college students, but with
middle-aged people working at companies that pride themselves on being
data-driven.
Recently, I was talking to a close male friend, who’s an engineering
leader, about the issue of women in tech. I suggested he ask a woman who
works for him—a person whose career he’s supported and nurtured for
years—what she thought. He looked up at me with real surprise. “I can’t
talk to her about that!” he exclaimed, genuinely surprised I’d suggest it.
This came from a man who’s not just unbiased but truly sensitive to bias
and determined to stamp it out. He catches things even I miss. So if he can’t
have a Radically Candid conversation about gender issues with a woman he
knows well, we’ve hit a real low. But the problem is not him, nor the
woman who works for him. I know them both, and I’m pretty sure that the
conversation would’ve gone well. It’s that the pervasive atmosphere of
anxiety around gender issues has everybody walking on eggshells and
avoiding important truths.
Another male colleague recently got caught in a firestorm by making an
important and logical point about gender in the workplace. Phrases he used
got taken out of context and blown up in the press and throughout social
media. This is another man who’s committed to treating everyone he works
with fairly and who regularly throws extra energy into fostering the careers
of his female colleagues. But after this kerfuffle, he decided he wasn’t
going to talk about gender publicly anymore. I couldn’t blame him. But it

was another blow to Radical Candor and to civil discourse on an important
topic where he was, for my money, on the right side.
We must stop gender politics.
Why gender bias makes Radical Candor harder for women
Gender bias makes it difficult for women to be Radically Candid with
both men and women.
One common bias women often fall prey to: the “Abrasive Trap.”
Here’s my personal experience with the Abrasive Trap. One day, my
boss called me into his office and asked me if I was familiar with recent
competence/likeability literature. I wasn’t, and he explained point-blank
that the more competent a woman is, the less her colleagues tend to like her.
There were a couple of people I worked with who, perhaps because of
gender bias, simply didn’t like me, my boss said. Rather than asking these
people to re-evaluate their attitudes, he asked me to work on my
“likeability.”
Naturally, I thought he should address the gender bias, not tell me to
work around it by baking cookies for people who resented my competence.
But I loved the work I was doing. I was close friends with the men sitting in
the offices to the right and left of me. And, in my heart, I knew I could be
obnoxiously aggressive sometimes; I don’t know anyone in a leadership
position who doesn’t fall into that quadrant a little more often than they’d
like to. Plus, I thought I knew which of my colleagues didn’t like me and
why the situation was driving my boss nuts. So I did everything I could to
make peace with him (short of baking cupcakes).
I was pretty sure I’d fixed the problem when my boss called me into his
office once more. He said things were better, but he had an idea that would
totally put the issue to rest. I was all ears. His suggestion? A demotion for
me. That way, he explained, my colleague would not be so jealous of my
position. That would make it easier for me to be more “likeable.” Less than
three weeks later, I found another, better job and quit.

I was lucky. This happened late enough in my career that I had lots of
other options. If it had happened earlier, though, I might have accepted the
demotion along with the bitterness that came with it. Or I might have quit
without the benefit of other job offers and been set back in my career.
Kieran Snyder, cofounder of Textio, applied linguistic analysis to
performance reviews, and she found that when women challenge directly—
which they must do to be successful—they get penalized for being
“abrasive.” (That word actually comes up verbatim a lot.) The “abrasive”
label gets placed on women by other women as well as by men.
Snyder wrote an article about her findings for Fortune which sparked
some of the longest, most impassioned email threads I’ve seen at several
companies that I advised. Why did this article strike such a nerve? Every
professional woman I know has many, many stories of being called
abrasive, or of being disliked for being too competent—and of paying the
price emotionally and professionally.
Let’s examine an abstract case, and show why the “abrasive” label holds
women back and contributes to fewer female leaders, even in organizations
that start out with a fifty-fifty gender balance. Take Snyder’s example of
two colleagues who perform at the same high level. Here’s the feedback
they received from their reports:

■ “Jessica is really talented, but I wish she’d be less abrasive. She comes on too strong.”
■ “Steve is smart and great to work with. He needs to learn to be a little more patient, but
who doesn’t?”

These comments will translate into performance ratings, and the ratings
will affect promotions. Let’s assume that Jessica gets a slightly lower rating
than Steve as a result of her so-called “abrasiveness.” Not such a big deal in
a given quarter, perhaps. But a series of lower ratings will eventually cost
Jessica a promotion. And even if the ratings aren’t lower, selection for
promotion and leadership roles depend heavily on “likeability.”

When bias plays out over a whole organization, the impact on female
leadership is profound. Researchers ran a simulation of what happens to
promotions over the course of several years when bias impacts ratings just a
little bit. When gender bias accounts for just 5 percent of the difference in
performance ratings, an organization that starts out with 58 percent of the
entry-level positions filled by women winds up with only 29 percent of the
leadership positions filled by women.1
Of course, that’s only part of the story. Let’s look at what happens to
Jessica personally over the course of her career. If she’s early in her career,
she’ll probably get promoted eventually despite her alleged “abrasiveness,”
but now she’s a year or so “behind” Steve. Fast forward another five to
seven years. Now Steve is two levels ahead of Jessica. Since pay increases
steeply with each promotion, he may be getting paid a lot more than Jessica
is. If Steve and Jessica get married, and they have a child, guess whose
career is more important for family income, and who’s more likely to stay
home from work when the baby is sick?
But that’s not even the worst-case scenario for Jessica. Let’s imagine
that she takes the “abrasive” feedback to heart and quits challenging her
reports directly. She adjusts her behavior so that she’s more likeable but less
effective at work. Instead of being Radically Candid, which gets her
unjustly accused of being obnoxiously aggressive, her feedback tends to be
ruinously empathetic or manipulatively insincere. This makes her less
effective as a leader. So now, in addition to gender bias, there are real
performance issues to contend with. In this case, Jessica is never going to
get ahead. Frustrated beyond measure and feeling that she must choose
between being liked and being successful, she decides that this is not a
game worth playing—and quits.
Some version of this dynamic has played out in the life of every woman
I know. Some have fought it successfully but we’ve all experienced it. We
must stop this madness, too.
What can you do?

These issues have gotten too hot to handle. Many men—even the men
who genuinely care about addressing gender bias—have understandably
decided it’s not worth the risk to talk about anything remotely related to
gender. The risk doesn’t necessarily come from the women they work with.
It sometimes comes from other men who stir the pot in an effort to use
gender issues to advance their careers. It sometimes comes from an
overzealous HR department. It sometimes comes from the law, which can
so often be absurdly inappropriate in a specific instance. It sometimes
comes from the pressures of social media, or a one-sided story in the press
—these stories are too often low-hanging fruit for reporters looking for
something sensational. Context matters, but the context of gender politics
and gender bias is becoming untouchable—to everyone’s detriment.
It doesn’t have to be this way. I have a few thoughts on how individuals
can take action to cool things down where they work on a daily basis.
Men: don’t “pull punches” with women
If you’re a man and worried that you might be pulling your punches
with female employees because you’re wary of gender politics or afraid
she’ll cry, it can be helpful to become aware of how the woman feels about
your guidance; just ask her. Try explaining the Radical Candor framework,
and then when you’re giving feedback simply say, “I’m trying to be
Radically Candid, and I want to check in with you to see how my feedback
is landing for you.” Ask her to gauge your praise and criticism. (Even if
you’re not worried about gender politics, it is a good idea to find out!) You
may not even be aware you’re going easy on some people and not others.
Women: demand criticism
Similarly, if you’re a woman and worried that your male boss is hesitant
to criticize your work, it can be helpful to make him aware that you want
more feedback.

Try saying, “What can I do or stop doing to make it easier for you to be
Radically Candid with me?” or “I’m worried you’re so concerned about my
feelings that you’re hesitant to give me the feedback I need to improve,” or
“The thing that I most need from you is to tell me what you really think.”
Then, pause. Count to six in your head. Embrace the discomfort. Do
whatever it takes to drag a candid assessment out of your male colleagues
or boss. Review the section above on getting guidance, and double down!
Men and women: things to think about when you feel a woman is being
“too aggressive”
Before you give feedback like that, try these tactics to make sure you’re
not falling into the competence/likeability trap. And don’t imagine you
won’t fall into the trap just because you’re a woman! Both genders are
equally guilty here I’ve found, unfortunately.
Switch genders. If the woman were a man who did the exact same thing,

would the criticism “you’re too aggressive” turn into “you really know how
to get things done”? Really imagine a man on your team doing exactly the
same thing the woman did. Now, how would you react? If you’d react
differently, you’re about to fall into the trap.
Two improv actors I know who do role plays to help people practice
giving good guidance at some major Silicon Valley companies did the
following experiment: they both used the word “fucking” when talking to
their “boss” in the role play. Participants, male and female, reacted with
extreme offense when the female actor used the word, but didn’t blink when
the male actor did. One participant, a woman, didn’t care when the male
actor used the word, but exclaimed, “I want to fire that bitch!” when the
female actor did.
Be more specific. Feedback like “you’re too aggressive” is too abstract and

thus subject to the abrasive trap. If you describe specific examples of how

this manifests itself, it will become more clear whether there is a real
problem, or if this is your unconscious bias at work.
Don’t use gendered language. Notice the words you use. Do you use words

like “abrasive,” “shrill,” “screechy,” or “bossy,” that are rarely used to
describe a man? If so, you may be about to fall into the trap. One of the
things I appreciated about working with Dick Costolo was that he
challenged the use of words like “abrasive,” especially in performance
reviews. He often caught nuances I myself had missed, and he always spoke
up when he heard something that seemed inappropriately gendered.
Never just say, “Be more likeable.” Make sure you address the situation by

giving women specific suggestions for changing their behavior and
becoming more effective. And remember that though gender bias is a fact
of life, it’s your job as the boss not to advise women how to navigate
around it, but instead to help your entire team recognize and eliminate it—
to create a more just working environment where unfair bias doesn’t hurt
anyone’s career.
Things to think about if you’re a woman who’s being told, “You’re
abrasive.”
Before you react to feedback that you’re too aggressive/abrasive/etc.,
consider the following four rules of thumb:
Never stop challenging directly. Too often, the advice to women who are

perceived as abrasive (or worse) is to stop challenging directly. This is
almost always the wrong answer. You must challenge directly to be
successful.
Care personally—but kill the angel in the office. Too often, in order to move up

on the “care personally” dimension, women expend too much energy
picking up the office housework or otherwise being the angel in the office,

to paraphrase Virginia Woolf. Self-abnegation is never an effective way to
show you care. You don’t have to bake cookies or get coffee or make the
copies or spend a lot of time and money on your clothes while the guys
wear jeans and company t-shirts if you don’t want to!
The competence/likeability research has not concluded that you weren’t out of line.

Remember: it is possible that you have been obnoxious. Don’t be the angel
in the office, but remain open to the possibility that you may have hurt
somebody unnecessarily.
Just because it’s wrong to kiss up and kick down doesn’t mean it’s right to do the opposite.

I’ve coached many, many women who make the same mistake I made with
my “clutter” email to Larry in Chapter Two. They are Radically Candid
with their teams, but obnoxiously aggressive with their bosses. I don’t have
any research to show that this is more common for women than for men but
it’s been pronounced enough in my personal experience that I mention it
here.
Don’t write men off. When I told my father about my boss who offered me a

demotion as a way to avoid the competence/likeability trap, he asked me
what I meant. I described for him the now-infamous case of Heidi/Howard
Roizen, in which a business school professor gave two different classes of
students the same case study about the real-life actions of real-life
entrepreneur Heidi Roizen—but he changed the gender of the protagonist
for one of the classes. When he surveyed students, they thought that Heidi
and Howard were equally competent, but that Heidi was a bitch and
Howard was a great guy. (My words!)
My father replied, “Yeah, I know what you mean, I work with a lot of
women who are just more aggressive than they need to be.” Now, my father
is one of the most intelligent people I’ve ever met, and he’s supported my
ambitions and my career every step of the way, starting with taking me out
to look at the stars through a telescope every night when I was ten and

wanted to be an astronaut. But neither his intelligence nor his love for me
and desire to see me succeed were strong enough to silence his unconscious
bias. He still tumbled right into the competence/likeability trap. I explained
it to him again, though, and we both had a good laugh. Luckily, he is my
father and I knew how deeply he cared. But if he’d been another man, I
might have been tempted to commit the fundamental attribution error—to
write him off as hopeless, a misogynist, a sexist pig, or some other epithet.
Don’t do that. Because it won’t help you solve the problem. Just keep
challenging directly and showing you care personally until they get it.

FORMAL PERFORMANCE REVIEWS
IT’S SAFE TO say that performance reviews rank up there with root canals,

though in this analogy, they’re probably just as painful for the dentist as for
the patient. To some degree this is unavoidable. If, like me, you are
reflexively suspicious that such processes are overly corporate, artificial,
and dehumanizing, you’re not going to look forward to them.
That is why GE—which pretty much invented performance reviews—
and a number of other companies are abolishing them. As long as these
companies take specific measures to create a culture of good guidance, and
as long as they figure out some other way to make the logic for decisions
about who gets salary increases, bonuses, and promotions transparent,
abolishing performance reviews may work. If your company doesn’t do
formal performance reviews, it’s especially important to double down on
impromptu guidance.

However, if your company does do performance reviews, don’t dismiss
them out of hand. I’ve found time and again that a formal performance
review with a rating sometimes clarifies in a way that impromptu feedback
does not. Imagine you’ve told one of your direct reports that his negativity
is hurting his ability to work well cross-functionally. He may hear you, but
he may not understand how much that matters until he gets a low
performance rating. Time and again, the miscommunication that
performance ratings revealed was nothing less than astounding to me. If
handled correctly, they offer an important opportunity to improve your
guidance.
The “if handled correctly” is a big part of making them work. If your
company has a formal performance review process, here is my advice for
delivering a performance review well.
No surprises. There should never be any surprises in a formal performance

review, and if you’ve been diligent about offering regular impromptu
guidance, you’ll lower the odds of this happening considerably.
Don’t rely on your unilateral judgment. Even if your company doesn’t require a

360 process so that you learn what other people think of your direct report’s
performance, you can still do a sanity check. One manager I know does this
by simply asking each person on the team to give their peers a √ −, √, √ +.
Most people get a √, and if they do that’s the end of the conversation. If one
person gives a peer a √ − or a √ +, he asks a couple more questions. This
takes about five minutes out of everyone’s 1:1 time twice a year, right
before performance reviews, and offers him a great sanity check to make
sure he’s being fair and seeing a broader perspective. In an ideal world,
these ratings would be transparent and attributed. However, building that
system would take time he doesn’t have. And everybody knows why he’s
doing this, so giving somebody a √ − doesn’t feel like “dirty escalation.”

Solicit feedback on yourself first. Asking each of my direct reports to give me a

performance review before I gave them one was helpful. The main
advantage here was that it made the review feel more like a two-way
conversation and less like an arrogant one-way judgment. Also, when I got
a review before I gave one, I understood how each of my reports was
thinking before I launched into their review. Sometimes, that made me reevaluate what I’d planned to say, or how I planned to say it.
Write it down. Writing is painstaking and time-consuming, and so a lot of

companies don’t require written performance reviews. But it’s happened to
me dozens of times that writing things down changes the review. I think I
know what I want to say during a review, and then when I start to write it
down, I realize that the situation is much more nuanced, upon reflection.
Taking the time to articulate your thinking on paper beforehand can spare
you the awkwardness of having to backpedal in the middle of a review, or
after you’ve delivered it.
I’ve also found that after I have written something down, it becomes
almost impossible for me to wimp out of saying it in the course of the
review. Sometimes the heat gets turned up pretty high during a performance
review and there’s the temptation to retreat into Ruinous Empathy. If I’ve
explicitly made note of an important criticism beforehand, I’m already one
step closer to Radical Candor.
Finally, a written review offers people a useful way of clarifying points
made during the meeting later on. There’s an awful lot to take in during a
performance review, and having a document to look back at later can be
really helpful. I carried the performance reviews that Sheryl wrote for me
around in my bag for months after the actual review, as a way to remind
myself of what I needed to work on.
Make a conscious decision about when to give the written review. There is no right

timing here. Some people are much better able to have a productive
conversation if they already know the substance of the review. Generally,

these are the people who really like to prepare, who hate surprises. Send it
the night before to those people. Others tend to read too much into what you
write, so it’s better to be there when they read it so you can clarify. If you
wrote, “Your team gets frustrated when you cancel your staff meeting at the
last minute,” they might interpret this to mean, “My team hates me, and I’ll
probably be fired tomorrow.” For people prone to such reactions, you need
to deliver the review orally, to check and recheck for understanding, before
giving it to them in writing. After you give these people a printout of the
written review, go get a cup of tea while they read it, and then return to talk.
No matter how you decide to deliver the review, commit to being Radically
Candid—and to being sure that what you have to say has been fully
understood by the other person.
Schedule at least fifty minutes in person, and don’t do reviews back-to-back. I was

always tempted to schedule a bunch of reviews back-to-back, thirty minutes
each, and knock them out quickly. But whenever I did reviews that way,
they went badly. The conversations often went longer than expected, so a
line of people waiting for their reviews would form outside my office. That
wasted people’s time (a cardinal sin for a boss) and made them
unnecessarily nervous. And, even when I scheduled more time, doing them
back-to-back was a bad idea. These conversations are often emotionally
draining, and I always needed more than a ten-minute break between them.
Spend half the time looking back (diagnosis), half the time looking forward (plan). When

I wrote performance reviews, I focused on being extremely clear about how
each person did over the past quarter/half/year. In the conversation,
however, I tried not to spend more than about half of the time talking about
the past, because it was more important to start engaging people on the
future. I didn’t come up with the plan—I asked them to. How would they
parlay success into even more success, or how would they address an area
of poor performance? Focusing on the future discourages people who did
well from resting on their laurels and prevents people who did badly from

wallowing in despair. Focusing on what each person plans to do differently
as a result of the review is also a great way to check for understanding—I
often thought I had been clear and realized the person hadn’t understood me
only when I heard the plans they were formulating as a result of the review.
Schedule regular check-ins to assess how the plan is working. Once I’d helped the

person whose performance I was reviewing to come up with a plan, it was
important to make it real by planning regular check-ins and marking them
in my calendar. This was often as simple as an agenda item in a couple of
future 1:1s in which the person reports progress to me. But some sort of
follow up was key.
Deliver the rating/compensation news after the performance review. If your company

gives formal ratings and/or ties those ratings to compensation, you need to
think clearly about how to sequence the information you’re giving them.
Many people are so focused on how their rating will affect their
compensation that it’s very hard for them to have a real conversation during
the performance review. It can therefore be helpful to separate the two, and
to deliver rating/compensation information after the conversation. I found
that when I announced the rating at the beginning, all too often the person
tuned out everything else I said. Sometimes this meant giving them the
rating/comp info at the end of the conversation. Other times I’d delay by a
day or more, asking them to come up with their thoughts and a plan for the
future first. Many companies separate “development conversations” from
“rating conversations” by a quarter or more. This is fine, as long as the
“development conversations” don’t substitute for regular impromptu
guidance, which should be happening on a weekly cadence.

PREVENT BACKSTABBING
You are a boss, not a diplomat. Shuttle diplomacy won’t work for you.
ONE OF THE most important ways to create an environment in which Radical

Candor trumps political BS is to never let one person on your team talk to

you about another behind their back. It feels like you’re being empathetic to
listen, but actually you’re just stirring the political pot. Instead, insist that
they talk directly to each other, without you. Hopefully, they’ll work it out.
But if they can’t, offer to have a three-way conversation, ideally in person
but at worst on the phone. This must be a live conversation (i.e., not over
email or text). When you have the conversation, help them come up with a
solution they can both understand and live with. I read an article about a
CEO who would come up with the worst possible solution for both people
when they couldn’t work things out without his intervention. He did it
because he hated mediating conflict. But that solution just created more
conflict, not less. Your job is to be supportive, not punitive, when people
come to you together with a conflict they cannot resolve. Open, fair, and
fast conflict resolution is one of the services you owe your direct reports.

PEER GUIDANCE
REMEMBER THAT GOOD guidance should happen in a conversation, in person.

There are a number of tools springing up that promise to replace the need to
give feedback by asking users to write little snippets of text; these then get
sent around and recorded, with analytics layers put on top. They look slick,
but in the end they are a giant step in the wrong direction for relationships
—a little bit like breaking up over text message. It’s important that you, as
the leader, encourage your team to take the time to talk to one another.
“Whoops the Monkey.” Dan Woods, who was CTO at a start-up where I

worked in the 1990s, developed the lowest-tech, cheapest, most effective
system for encouraging praise and criticism on a team that I’ve seen. It

involved two stuffed animals: a whale and a monkey. At every all-hands
meeting, he invited people to nominate each other to win the “Killer
Whale” for a week. The idea was to get people from the team to stand up
and talk about some extraordinary work they’d seen somebody else do. The
winner of the whale the previous week decided who deserved the whale this
week. Next, people nominated themselves for “Whoops the Monkey.” If
anyone screwed up that week, they could stand up, tell the story, get
automatic forgiveness, and help prevent somebody else from making the
same mistake. When we first started doing this at both Juice and Google,
there was silence. You could hear crickets. Not knowing what else to do, I
put twenty dollars on Whoops’s head. Once people could pretend that they
weren’t copping to my corny stuffed animal but simply wanted that twenty
dollars, the stories started pouring out. This practice not only made it safe to
make mistakes—and therefore to innovate—it also speeded up resolution to
problems that otherwise would have festered. I once learned that somebody
on my team had mortally offended an executive and that I needed to do
some damage control. I knew the executive and could help. Another time I
discovered that a mistake made by my team had infuriated a customer who
now needed appeasing. I knew the customer and now that I heard about the
problem I could help. The stories that the Killer Whale and Whoops elicited
became my favorite part of most all-hands meetings. We all learned a lot in
fifteen minutes.

Of course, that approach won’t work everywhere. Apple, for example,
was a “measure twice, cut once” kind of place, very different from Google’s
“launch and iterate” ethos. A practice like Whoops the Monkey would have

been false advertising, and the stuffed animals would definitely not have
met the design ethos at Apple!
In some industries, like aviation, sharing mistakes is so important that
joking about Whoops the Monkey would simply be inappropriate. When a
pilot makes a mistake, it could cost the lives of hundreds. Yet, pilots are
human and will make mistakes. The more they can learn from one another’s
mistakes, the safer air travel can be. The Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) wanted to figure out how to get pilots sharing information freely
after near-misses or crashes. Because the FAA has the authority to revoke
licenses from pilots, it was unlikely that pilots would be forthcoming about
mistakes they’d made. So, the FAA funded a program that NASA
administers: the Aviation Safety Reporting System. Retired pilots talk to
pilots involved in safety incidents, to figure out what happened. As long as
the pilots hadn’t been careless or reckless, they were granted immunity for
their mistakes. This made it safe for them to share information, and as a
result we are all a lot safer when we fly.
Imagine if there were a similar Medical Safety Reporting System. What
if, instead of suing doctors who made honest mistakes we gave them
immunity, collected and shared the information, and came up with ways to
help other doctors avoid making the same mistakes? If we made it safer for
doctors to give each other guidance, and to learn from each other’s
mistakes, the impact could be enormous.
Peer gauging. Another good way to get people talking to each other is to

explain the Radical Candor framework to your team. Explain how you ask
your team to gauge the guidance you give them, so that you can improve
your guidance. Encourage them to gauge their peer guidance. Having a
shared vocabulary will help your culture move toward Radical Candor.

SPEAKING TRUTH TO “POWER”
worked first at NASA and then in Learning and
Development at Google, once told me that one of the most important things
ROXANE WALES, WHO

any manager of managers could do to foster a culture of guidance was to
have so-called “skip level meetings.” In these meetings, which need to
happen only once a year to be effective, you will meet with the people who
work for your direct reports, without your direct reports in the room, and
ask what they could do or stop doing to be better bosses.

This sounds super hierarchical, but let’s face it: the “flat” organization is
a myth. Hierarchy is an inescapable fact of life. The best way to lower the
barriers that hierarchy puts between us is to admit that it exists and think of
ways to make sure everyone feels they are on an equal footing at a human
level despite the structure. To make sure everyone feels free to “speak truth
to power.”
The rationale for skip level meetings is that most people are very
reluctant to criticize their boss. Plus, managers, especially new managers,
will consciously or unconsciously seek to repress criticism rather than to
encourage it. Finding out when this is happening and stamping it out will
preserve a culture of Radical Candor and prevent a whole world of misery
for the people who work for such a manager.
You have to be really careful with skip level meetings. They can turn
into gripe sessions, and it must be clear that you aren’t automatically
presuming that the boss, your direct report, is guilty, or that you’re
unwilling to hear any criticism of your direct report. The intent of these
sessions is to be supportive of the managers who report to you, not to
undermine them. And part of being supportive is knowing when they are
screwing up, and helping them address the situation. Also, for your own
sanity, as well as for the sake of building a radically candid culture, it’s

important that these meetings not encourage people to come running to you
instead of talking directly to their boss. Here are a few rules of thumb I
learned for conducting them.
Explain it. Show it. Explain it again. Explain to each of your direct reports that

you have two goals: 1) to help each of them become better bosses and 2) to
make sure people on their team feel comfortable giving them feedback
directly.
Show you mean what you just said. Start by asking your boss or
somebody who has time to do a skip level on you. If you’re the CEO, ask a
coach or an advisor or board member to do it.
Never have a skip level meeting without prior consent of your direct
report. Instead, ask the managers who report to you to explain the whole
thing to their teams beforehand. It’s vital that everyone understands that the
meeting with you is in support of, not an attack on, their boss. Then, when
you begin the meeting, reiterate that the goal of the meeting is to help the
boss get better. Remind people that the goal is to create a culture where
everyone always feels comfortable giving guidance, especially criticism,
directly to their bosses—and that this meeting is a step in that direction, not
a substitute for that goal.
More importantly, never have skip level meetings for some of the
people who work for you but not others. It must be clear that this is a
routine process undertaken for anyone who has direct reports. If you have
skip level meetings only when there are problems on a team, then they will
become a punishment rather than a welcome tool to help people develop
their management skills.
Ensure the meeting is “not for attribution.” Ensure everyone understands that,

while the goal is to get everyone comfortable giving feedback directly to
their boss, this is a “not for attribution” meeting. In other words, everything
of import will be shared with their boss, but not who said it.

Take notes and project them. Project the notes you take during the meeting,

and let people know that you will share them with the manager. Encourage
people to say something if they find the notes inaccurate. When people
speak up, be sure to change the notes and double check they are OK before
proceeding. It is important to take the notes yourself, rather than asking
somebody else to do it. First, it shows you are listening and engaged.
Second, it’s a great way to learn when you misunderstand something.
Kick-start the conversation. The first of these meetings is often incredibly

awkward. You’ll have to work hard to earn the trust of everyone in the
room. Generally, it’s easiest to start with praise to get people talking, “What
is your manager doing well?” Then, “What could your manager be doing
better?” Then, “What really sucks?” As problems emerge, try to get people
to think about solutions, so it doesn’t devolve into a gripe session. But if
you’re getting a lot of complaints, remind yourself it is a good thing not a
bad thing. You are failing only if it is all sweetness and light.
Prioritize issues. Once things get flowing, remind people that often far

more issues will get raised than will get fixed. The goal is to make things
better—making them perfect is unrealistic. Push the people in the room to
decide what the most important issues are and to prioritize those.
Share notes right after the meeting. When there are about eight minutes left in

the meeting, ask everyone to look at the notes, reminding them that you’ll
be sharing the document with their boss momentarily. This has a way of
focusing the conversation and making people feel accountable for their
suggestions. The immediacy—you’re going to share this with the person
you were talking about eight minutes from now!—makes the conversation
feel less like it is happening behind the person’s back. It also means you
don’t have to remember to send the notes out to all the participants to
double-check that everybody is comfortable with them, and then remember
to share it with your direct report. You do all that in the meeting and spare

yourself the unnecessary “next steps” that too often clutter your brain or
just don’t happen. This also alleviates the anxiety of the person who is
being evaluated. They want to know what was said right away!
Ensure that your directs make and communicate changes. Once your direct reports

have read the notes you’ve gathered, work with each to come up with one
or two specific things they can immediately change. It mustn’t be
something big and vague like, “Improve my relationships.” Much better if
it’s something smaller but more tangible like, “I will disagree in person, not
over email.” Encourage each of your direct reports to send an email out to
their teams explaining what they have learned and what they are going to do
differently as a result, and to cc you on the note. Then, encourage them to
follow up in the next staff meeting to get a sense of whether people feel this
has gone far enough. The more visible the change, the better. Review these
changes in a follow-up to the skip level meeting, and encourage the team to
tell you whether or not they made a difference. If people feel that no
changes were made, or that the meeting didn’t make a difference, treat this
very seriously. In extreme cases, you may want to remove the manager in
question from the team—either to return to an individual contributor role, to
manage a different team, or to be fired.
Have these meetings once a year for each of your direct reports. The
biggest problem with skip level meetings is that when they start going well,
everybody wants them all the time, and you can get skip level proliferation.
At one point at Google, I felt like I had a skip level meeting every other
day. They take a lot of energy and focus and can lead to burn-out if you
have to do too many of them. I recommend doing it once per year for each
of your direct reports, and, if you manage managers, insist that they do the
same. That way, the process scales and takes you just about seven to eight
(an hour per skip level, half an hour per skip-level follow-up) hours a year
if you have five direct reports.

Skip level meeting FAQs
I’ve worked with dozens of people who’ve become managers of
managers for the first time, and these skip level meetings were always a
source of great interest and anxiety. Here are some of the questions people
have asked me most often.
What if it becomes clear that an entire team has lost faith in their manager? This will

rarely happen—in years of doing these meetings, this has only happened to
me three times. In each case, I started digging into the problems and found
that the manager in question absolutely should not have been managing
people.
What if people won’t talk? Break the

ice with them. “So everything is
perfect?” Also, try to have a couple of issues you have heard about and
offer those up. Ask, “If you could change one thing…” and then go around
the room and put everyone on the spot to answer. Embrace the discomfort!
What if people won’t shut up? If one person is doing all the talking, read faces

carefully. If somebody looks as though they agree or disagree strongly, ask
what they think. If somebody looks bored, ask, “So, this issue doesn’t seem
to resonate for you. Are there others on your mind?” If there seem to be
more problems than you can cope with, focus the conversation on
prioritizing them. Remind people that personality transplants are not
available.
How do you strike the right balance between being supportive of the boss you’re hearing
about and being open to the team’s thoughts? Be careful not to judge or defend the

manager about whom you are soliciting feedback. If it feels as though you
are fishing for reasons to punish the boss in question, either people will
clam up or a gripe session will ensue. Make it clear that your role is not to
judge but to pass along the feedback. If you encounter a really big problem,
promise to look into it more deeply. Do not judge anything on the spot.

Don’t defend or malign the boss you’re hearing about. That doesn’t mean
you can’t sympathize with the way people feel, though. There’s a world of
difference between saying, “Wow, I can tell this is stressful. I’m sorry about
that. Let’s see what we can do to improve the situation,” and saying, “Wow,
your boss is a micromanager. Don’t worry—I’m going to put a stop to this!”
* * *
THE KEY TO success when implementing any of these suggestions is to

return to core principles, rather than following step-by-step instructions.
Remember: if you are being Radically Candid, you are demonstrating, in a
day-to-day way, that you are seeing the individuals on your team and the
work they are doing. Even when you have particular criticisms, that level of
attention is implicitly complimentary. And if you are demonstrating daily
that you care personally, your Radically Candid responses are taken far
more seriously, even embraced. Whenever you feel yourself getting lost in
the weeds, simply return to these two questions: “Am I showing my team
that I care personally?” and “Am I challenging each person directly?” If the
answer to both questions is yes, you’re doing just fine.

7.
TEAM
Techniques for avoiding boredom and
burnout
CHAPTER THREE (“UNDERSTAND WHAT MOTIVATES Each Person on Your Team”)

discussed the importance of getting to know each person who reports to you
well enough that you can put the right people in the right roles, avoiding
both boredom and burn-out. Ideally, you want everyone on your team to
achieve exceptional results. But you don’t want 100 percent of them to be
gunning for the next job—or to be content with their current role. Instead
you want a balance, so that you have both people who push for change and
those who offer stability. And to understand what motivates the different
people you work with, you need to have Radically Candid relationships
with each.
Of course, the real world is rarely ideal. Typically, some people on your
team will be achieving just mediocre results, and some may be failing
altogether. You’ll get the biggest bang for your buck spending time with the
people who are doing the best work, but you still need to figure out how to
manage everybody else. What follows are some specific techniques for
doing just that.

CAREER CONVERSATIONS
Understand people’s motivations and ambitions to help them take a step in the direction of their
dreams

Chapter Three, all people have their own growth
trajectories, and it’s a mistake to push everyone to be either a “superstar” or
a “rock star.” You need to balance growth and stability. To understand a
person’s growth trajectory, it’s important to have career conversations in
which you get to know each of your direct reports better, learn what their
aspirations are, and plan how to help them achieve those dreams. You
should have these conversations with each person who reports directly to
you, regardless of where they are in the team framework described in
Chapter Three.
AS DESCRIBED IN

Once you’ve gotten the hang of these conversations, you’ll look forward
to them. They are your single biggest opportunity to move up on the “care
personally” axis of the Radical Candor framework. In fact, these
conversations are the very first thing I recommend you do when rolling out
Radical Candor on your team. Yes, they do take time, but they can occur in
your usual 1:1 slots. And they will generate some of the most enjoyable
conversations you have as a boss.
Russ Laraway, the cofounder of our company, Candor, Inc., is the very
best manager I’ve ever worked with in my career. He developed a
particularly effective approach during a difficult period at Google. At the
time, Russ was a Director of Sales, and he had taken over a team that had
come in via an acquisition. The new arrivals were thoroughly demoralized:

pessimistic about their growth opportunities at Google and convinced their
managers didn’t value them. Very few reported that they expected to be
working at Google in three years. But Google had spent over a billion
dollars to acquire their company, and it needed the team intact if the
investment was to be worthwhile. Russ realized if he didn’t do something
fast he wasn’t going to have much of a team left. He knew his first step was
to show them that the company cared about them. But of course it’s bosses
who give a damn—companies can’t care personally any more than
governments or any other institution can.
Russ knew that the single biggest concern of employees at Google—
both on his team and generally—was their career prospects. This was partly
a money-driven problem—the cost of housing is so absurdly high in Silicon
Valley that few people could afford to buy a house, even though they were
working at Google. It was also an age issue. Google had an extremely
young employee base, and a critical mass of people were about to turn
thirty; many of them felt that they were barreling toward midlife crises. At
an off-site retreat with her whole team during this period, Sheryl decided to
address this company-wide anxiety about so-called “career growth”. “You
need a long-term vision and an eighteen-month plan,” she advised.
This struck Russ. How could he help everyone who worked for him
articulate their long-term vision and their eighteen-month plan? And how
could he teach them to help their direct reports, and so on, cascading to all
seven hundred people on his team? The existing solutions that were offered
were called “personal development plans,” and they weren’t that useful.
Some pretty much told everyone their careers were their own
responsibilities; others focused minutely on the steps one had to take to get
a promotion. They were either a blank canvas or an uninspiring paint-bynumbers picture. What was needed here was some education, in the literal
sense—the latin root educo meaning “to lead out.” People knew what they
wanted. Russ felt it was a boss’s job to help them articulate it, and then
achieve it.

Russ tried asking “Todd” to describe his long-term vision for his career.
Todd said what he thought Russ wanted to hear—essentially, he wanted to
be just like Russ when he grew up. Russ laughed. “That’s not ambitious
enough! I’m not even sure I want this job. You want more. You deserve
more!” Todd wasn’t budging. Russ tried another tack. “OK. That’s one
vision. But nobody really knows what they want to do when they grow up.
Give me another vision.” This time, Todd confessed he wanted to be more
like a mini Jack Welch than a Russ Laraway (i.e., to be a CEO, but perhaps
not a Fortune 500 CEO). Russ knew he was getting somewhere now.
Something similar happened when he tried this again with another
person, “Sarah.” First she said she wanted to be like Russ, then she talked
about another, larger ambition. “What about another vision,” Russ asked.
“A CAD—crazy-ass dream.” Now, Sarah said what she really wanted to do
was to start a spirulina farm. Whoa, what? Spirulina, Russ learned, is a
superfood: a bacteria rich in protein and iron.
Now Russ was intrigued. How was a job persuading people to use
DoubleClick to serve their ads going to help Todd become a mini Jack
Welch or Sarah to manage a spirulina farm? Russ decided not to worry
about that right away but instead simply to get to know each of his direct
reports better. Russ had thought that he knew them all pretty well, but
clearly he didn’t. The next time they talked, Russ asked each more about
their life story.
When Sarah talked about previous transitions she’d made—quitting one
sport and focusing on another, for example—Russ asked more questions.
By the end of the conversation, he understood much better what motivated
Sarah at work. He then wrote down each of her motivators (e.g., “financial
independence,” “environmentalism,” “hard work,” “leadership”) and
explained how the stories she’d told him about her life had led him to
choose these words. This was an important check for understanding. For
example, Russ had chosen the word “leadership” as a key motivator for
Sarah, based on a story she’d told him about volunteer work she’d done to
preserve California’s open-space preserves. But she didn’t like that word,

preferring “stewardship.” Russ realized how valuable this conversation was,
and decided that going forward he’d ask people about their past before
moving on to their future.
Now, Russ was ready for the task of connecting what Sarah was doing
right now to what she wanted to be doing at the very peak of her career.
Russ, who’s very analytical, put each of Sarah’s dreams into columns. Next,
he asked Sarah what skills she thought were most important to achieve each
dream. Finally, he asked Sarah what skills she felt she had the most
competence in.
This analysis helped Russ and Sarah figure out what skills were most
important for her to begin developing or to continue deepening. For
example, it became clear that the most important thing that Sarah could
work on now was getting management experience. She’d been thinking she
needed to develop her analytical skills and her presentation skills. And if
her goal were to be a director at Google, that would’ve been important. But
management skills were much more important to a spirulina rancher than
presentation skills. Furthermore, Sarah hated making presentations, and she
didn’t want to develop her analytical skills. But she was interested in
getting some real management experience. Now it was more clear to both
Sarah and Ross why.
Together, she and Russ came up with a plan to make sure she got
increased management responsibility and also some mentorship from other
great leaders at Google. While making the plan, it also became evident that
Sarah could get the management experience faster by staying at Google
than by leaving. Furthermore, Russ, her immediate boss, was one of the
best managers in the company. Sarah decided to stay at Google for a few
more years, where she became an enormously effective leader. She was
getting the skills she needed, and saving money for her spirulina ranch. The
work she was doing, which had seemed so separate from what she really
wanted out of life, now made a lot more sense to her.
Realizing he’d come up with a good methodology for having career
conversations, Russ held an off-site and taught his managers how to talk to

their direct reports not just about their career goals or how to get promoted
but also about their life stories and dreams. He taught every manager on his
team to have a succession of three forty-five-minute conversations with
each direct report over the course of three to six weeks.
Russ’s approach was so successful that an internal survey of employee
satisfaction showed the people on his team displaying a marked increase in
optimism about their futures at Google and their positive feelings about
their managers. Nobody from HR had ever seen such an improvement.
Conversation one: life story
The first conversation is designed to learn what motivates each person
who reports directly to you. Russ suggested a simple opening to these
conversations. “Starting with kindergarten, tell me about your life.” Then,
he advised each manager to focus on changes that people had made and to
understand why they’d made those choices. Values often get revealed in
moments of change. “You dropped out of graduate school after two years to
work on Wall Street—please tell me more about that decision.” Answers
like, “I couldn’t even afford orange juice on my grad school stipend, and I
just wanted to make more money,” or “I was bored with all that theory and
no practical, tangible application of the ideas I was working on,” enable you
to begin to put together parts of the human puzzle. In the first case, you
might write down “financial independence” as a key motivator; in the
second, “see tangible results of work.” If somebody says they quit running
and started playing soccer because they liked being on a team, you might
write down “being part of a team” as a motivator. If on the other hand
somebody quit cheerleading to focus on swimming because they “were sick
of the chitchat and preferred to focus on beating a personal best,” you might
write down “personal growth” as a motivator.
Remember, you’re not looking for definitive answers; you’re just trying
to get to know people a little better and understand what they care about.

Many managers initially felt some discomfort with this kind of get-toknow-you conversation. It seemed like a boundary violation to ask people
about their lives outside of work. Russ explained two things. One, most
people are happy to have this conversation, as long as it takes place in an
environment of trust and respect. If part of your job is to care personally,
you have to get to know people personally. Two, there may be times when
you touch on something that is too personal. If a person signals discomfort
at a question, you have to respect that. For example, one person seemed
profoundly uncomfortable with some basic questions about childhood.
Sensing this, Russ let childhood drop, and the woman went on to describe
her life after grad school, becoming much more confident. As he got to
know her better, Russ learned that she’d had some significant trauma
growing up. But she hadn’t been comfortable telling Russ about it during a
get-to-know-you conversation, and Russ hadn’t pressed.
Russ has all of his managers practice these get-to-know-you
conversations with each other, in order to get people more comfortable with
having them, and also to be sensitive to not pressing beyond each person’s
level of comfort. Also, practicing these conversations helps to remind
everyone that they have a goal: learning what motivates people at work.
The reason to pull these motivations out of a life story rather than to
discuss them abstractly is that it’s so easy to misunderstand abstractions.
For example, an employee may say that financial independence is really
important to her, and you may assume that’s simply another way of saying
that she’s materialistic. If instead she tells you the following story, you
might come away with a different impression: When she was twelve, her
mother went back to work and the family was missing her full-time
presence at home. They decided to take a trip to New Orleans to spend
some time together. As they strolled down Bourbon Street, your employee
glanced into a strip joint and saw an almost naked woman twisted around a
pole. She was horrified. Her father, who had already downed a couple of
milk punches, noticed. “See that woman?” he said. “She makes more
money in a single day than your mother makes in a year.” Your employee

felt so angry. On behalf of the woman on the pole, on behalf of her
underpaid mother, at the whole world for all that her father’s comment
implied about being female. That is what she means when she says financial
independence is important to her. It’s not just selfish materialism.
Just this first of the three conversations will have a big impact. First,
you’ve done more in forty-five minutes to get to know each person who
reports to you than you could do in any other way. You’ve done something
to show you care, and—invariably, after a conversation like that—you do
care more. Next, you’re already better equipped to figure out what kinds of
opportunities would be helpful for each person. Finally, you’re more
prepared for the next conversation. When you understand what motivates a
person and why, you’re much better able to understand their dreams.
The second conversation: dreams
The second conversation moves from understanding what motivates
people to understanding the person’s dreams—what they want to achieve at
the apex of their career, how they imagine life at its best to feel. Russ chose
the word “dreams” very consciously. Bosses usually ask about “long-term
goals” or “career aspirations” or “five-year plans,” but each of these
phrases, when used by a boss, tends to elicit a certain type of answer: a
“professional,” and not entirely human, answer. It also invites a response
that the person imagines the boss wants to hear rather than a description of
what the person really wants to achieve; a delicate balance between trying
to appear sufficiently ambitious (“I want to be like you.”) and yet not too
ambitious (“But I don’t want your job.”). “What are your career
aspirations?” doesn’t invite a description of dreams that involve an entirely
different career or employer—like the spirulina farm. Furthermore,
questions about “career” tend to focus on promotions, and these
conversations are never satisfying. People who want a promotion never feel
they’re getting one fast enough; people who don’t want one feel lame for
being insufficiently ambitious when you ask them about career aspirations.

When a personal development plan focuses too narrowly on the things a
person has to do to get a promotion, it results in a conversation that leaves
people worried they appear unserious about their current job and employers
worried about encouraging people to leave. Maybe they don’t want the next
promotion, but the way the conversation is structured makes them reluctant
to say so. Maybe they do want it, but for reasons they are not invited to
share.
Giving space for people to talk about dreams allows bosses to help
people find opportunities that can move them in the direction of those
dreams. This makes work more satisfying and more meaningful and
ultimately improves retention. But retention was the by-product—
satisfying, meaningful work and productive relationships with the boss
were the primary goals of Russ’s “career conversation” process.
So what do you use in place of the standard questions? Russ
recommends that you begin these conversations with, “What do you want
the pinnacle of your career to look like?” Because most people don’t really
know what they want to do when they “grow up,” Russ suggests
encouraging people to come up with three to five different dreams for the
future. This allows employees to include the dream they think you want to
hear as well as those that are far closer to their hearts.
Ask each direct report to create a document with three to five columns;
title each with the names of the dreams they described in the last
conversation. Then, list the skills needed as rows. Show how important
each skill is to each dream, and what their level of competency is in that
skill. Generally, it will become very obvious what new skills the person
needs to acquire. Now, your job as the boss is to help them think about how
they can acquire those skills: what are the projects you can put them on,
whom can you introduce them to, what are the options for education?
The final part of Russ’s second conversation involves making sure that
the person’s dreams are aligned with the values they have expressed. For
example, “If ‘hard work’ is a core value, why is one of your dreams to retire
early?” Inquiring about the dreams people describe is an important way to

push for candid, meaningful conversations. In one instance at Google,
Russ’s question revealed that the person had a special-needs child whose
condition was expected to become especially acute in the teenage years.
This father wanted to make sure he would be able to focus his entire
attention on his child when the child was likely to need him most. That put
his plans for early retirement in a whole different light.
You’re not going to get the dramatic “spirulina ranch” story out of most
people. I once worked with a man who had a baby with major health issues.
The thing he cared most about at work during this period was getting home
in time to take a thirty-minute walk with his wife during daylight hours.
Given everything going on in his life, that seemed pretty ambitious, and I
did everything I could to make sure he got out of the office in time for those
walks.
Conversation three: eighteen-month plan
Last, Russ taught managers to get people to begin asking themselves the
following questions: “What do I need to learn in order to move in the
direction of my dreams? How should I prioritize the things I need to learn?
Whom can I learn from?” How can I change my role to learn it? Once
people were clear on what they wanted to learn next, it was much easier for
managers to identify opportunities at work that would help them develop
skills in the next six to eighteen months that would take them in the
direction of at least one of their dreams. This translation of current work to
future dreams was far more inspiring for people than “Here’s how you
climb the next rung on the ladder.”
Here’s what to do: make a list of how the person’s role can change to
help them learn the skills needed to achieve each dream; whom they can
learn from; and classes they could take or books they could read. Then, next
to each item, note who does what by when—and make sure you have some
action items.

Helping people clarify values and dreams and then aligning them as
closely as possible with their current work will invariably make your team
stronger. Each individual will be more successful and happier, and together
you’ll achieve results “unexpected in common hours.” Thoreau said it best
in Walden:
“If one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life
which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. He will put
some things behind, will pass an invisible boundary … If you have built castles in the air,
your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under
them.”

It’s scary to move confidently in the direction of one’s dreams. Part of
your responsibility as the boss is to help people find the courage to do just
that. If you do it well, there are few more rewarding jobs.
* * *
THIS IS A high-level overview of three conversations that on the surface

seem pretty straightforward. There’s a lot riding on your ability to get them
right: building trust with the people who report to you, figuring out what
role each person is best suited for so that your team can achieve results. If
you have additional questions about what you can do to ensure they go
well, you can ask Russ directly at www.radicalcandor.com/contact. Your
questions may very well become part of the book Russ is writing to help
you better understand how to have these career conversations.

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
Figure out who needs what types of opportunities, and how you’re going to provide them
YOU’VE HAD YOUR three conversations and begun the process of lining up

opportunities on your team with each person’s aspirations. These efforts
have moved you way up on the “care personally” dimension of Radical
Candor. Now it’s time to move over on the “challenge directly” dimension.

Once a year, you need to put together a growth-management plan for
each person on your team. Take a look across your whole team and make
sure that you understand how each individual’s aspirations and growth
trajectory is lining up with the collective needs of the team. Then, unless
everyone on your team is both where they want and where they need to be,
you’re going to have to have some pretty challenging conversations.
Put names in boxes (temporarily!)
The first step is to identify your rock stars and superstars. Write their
names in the correct boxes. Next, identify the people on your team who are
doing good, but not exceptional, work. This will probably be the majority of
people. Then, identify the people who are performing poorly but whom you
believe should do much better, either because they are demonstrating signs
that they can improve or because their skills and ambitions suggest
improvement is possible. Finally—and this is usually the hardest part—
identify the people who are not doing good work and not getting any better.
Don’t obsess—spend twenty minutes, maximum, doing this exercise. Think
fast.

Then, to make sure you are not biased, get an outside perspective. Find
someone who is familiar with the work of the people on your team but not
as emotionally attached as you are—your boss, a peer, an HR person. If
they would put your people in different boxes, make sure you understand
why, even if you disagree. Especially if you disagree.
Write growth plans
Next, come up with a three- to five-bullet-point growth plan for each
person. Make sure that you have projects or opportunities that will stretch
the superstars. Make sure that you’re giving the rock stars what they need to
be productive. Think of ways to push people who are doing good work to
do exceptional work. What kind of new projects or education or help can
you offer them? For the people who are doing bad work but show signs of
improving: have you put these people in the wrong roles? Are expectations
clear? Do they need additional training?
And that brings us to the people who are doing bad work and not getting
any better. At some point, you have to initiate the process of firing these
people—most bosses understandably wait too long for this. If you’re at a
big company, you’ll probably need to talk to HR about a formal
Performance Improvement Plan. How you handle firing people can have a
tremendous effect not just on the future of the person you fire but also on
how your team perceives you and the company. It can also have a big

impact on you. Just the other day, Russ and I went on a sales call. Who was
across the table from us? Somebody Russ had fired a few years ago. All
three of us were glad that Russ had handled it well.
Back to happier things. If you are regularly thinking about personal
growth, as you should be, you shouldn’t need to spend more than five to
fifteen minutes per direct report jotting down growth plans. This should feel
more like a disciplined sanity check than an arduous process. It’s a way to
make sure you have the whole team’s growth trajectory in your head.
Don’t be an “easy grader” or a “hard grader”
If a lot of your peers are also doing growth-management plans, it’s a
good idea to compare notes. When you’re part of a broader team, it’s
important to have a shared understanding of what exceptional work is, what
good work is, and what bad work is. For example, if you have half your
team in the rock-star box and nobody else has anyone there, it is more likely
that you’re out of step with your colleagues than that you have the best
team.
If you are a manager of managers, find a simple way to keep everyone
on the same page. For example, you can create a shared document and have
all your directs put the names from their teams into the appropriate boxes,
then get in a room together and discuss. If disputes erupt, ask people to
resolve them in a separate meeting and then report back on what they
decide, or to ask you to make a decision if they cannot agree on one. These
are hard conversations, but worthwhile because they encourage more
consistency among managers. Making sure that all managers are treating
the different types of high performers similarly is important to making sure
everyone feels the system is fair. It will also give your team the opportunity
to be explicit about what they feel the right ratio of people on a steep versus
gradual growth trajectory ought to be.
Ensure fairness by level

Because you care so much about your direct reports, you tend to see the
best in them. This is a good thing, but it can turn into a form of unconscious
bias on a really big team. If you’re the leader of a team of five hundred
people, you’ll naturally tend to think most highly of your direct reports.
And these direct reports think most highly of their direct reports. So if
you’re not careful, a disproportionate percentage of the people considered
rock stars or superstars will be the most senior people in a hierarchy, even
though that kind of grade inflation may not reflect reality.
Ensuring fairness across levels both cultivates growth throughout the
organization and avoids unnecessary resentment. Too often, the people who
have the most senior roles are given the highest ratings when in fact they
are surfing on the productivity of the people working for them. Don’t let
that happen! In general, one would expect there to be the same distribution
of excellent performance throughout, as well as a higher ratio of more
senior people on a gradual growth trajectory and a higher ratio of more
junior people on a steep growth trajectory. In practice, most management
teams respond in the reverse manner—a greater percentage of senior rather
than junior people get put in the superstar box. If this happens, ask some
hard questions and make sure there’s an identifiable, justifiable reason for
it.

HIRING: YOUR MENTALITY AND YOUR PROCESS
WHEN HIRING, YOU’RE obviously looking for people who will be great at the

job. But should you be hiring rock stars or superstars? The answer is, of
course, “It depends.” There are some jobs that require one or the other. Also
you want to make sure you have the right ratio overall on your team. If you
have too many superstars, hire a rock star next.
Process
Your hiring process is important; it’s a vital part of building a great
team. When you are growing really fast, you’ll wind up spending a lot of

your time hiring. At one point when I was at Google, I spent 25 percent of
my time hiring people.
What follows are descriptions of the key things I’ve seen work (and not
work) at Google, Apple, and elsewhere. These are the basic elements of a
hiring process that is as rigorous as possible without being overly onerous.
All hiring is flawed and subjective, and these drawbacks cannot be fixed;
they can only be managed. Here are some simple things you can do to make
sure you’re hiring the right people:

Job description: define team “fit” as rigorously as you define “skills” to minimize bias.

The hiring person—not a recruiter!—should write the job description,
basing it on the role, the skills required for the role, and the team “fit”
criteria. Defining team fit can be hard, which makes it tempting to leave
out. Try to describe your culture in three to four words. It could be “detailoriented,” “quirky,” and “blunt.” Or maybe it’s “big picture,”
“straightlaced,” and “polite.” Whatever you choose, be disciplined about
interviewing for those things. This will help people avoid making gut
decisions that are so often driven by bias. Also, if you take the time to
define the growth trajectory required for the role, it can help the
interviewers avoid one kind of hiring bias: hiring people who share your
ambitions, which may not be desirable for the role. The written job

description should then go to all interviewers, so they know precisely what
they are interviewing for.
Blind skills assessments can also minimize bias. Interviewing takes time, filling

out interview feedback reports takes time, and so it’s important to be very
selective about who gets invited to interview. A number of false positives
and false negatives can be weeded out with a good prescreen. An example
of a good prescreen is a skills assessment: ask potential candidates to do a
project or solve a problem related to the job they’re applying for. This will
weed out a number of candidates who look good on paper but can’t actually
do the work. It will also give candidates who’d be great at the job but look
bad on paper the opportunity to interview.
In an ideal world, this would be a blind skills assessment. Malcolm
Gladwell tells a now-famous story about how orchestras that implemented
blind auditions increased the percentage of women hired fivefold.
Whenever possible, give candidates the opportunity to show the kind of
work they can do without looking at who the person is.
Some companies have even experimented with asking candidates to do
a skills assessment online, stripping out all personally identifying
information. The people assessing the skills can’t guess at the candidate’s
gender, race, etc. This is a brilliant idea, albeit very time-consuming and not
always practicable. But increasingly services like hired.com offer a bias
screen that filters out name and photo so that you’re just looking at skills
when seeing résumés.
Use the same interview committee for multiple candidates, to allow for meaningful

If you can avoid it, don’t make unilateral hiring decisions.
Because interviewing is so subjective and prone to bias, you’ll improve
your odds of making good decisions by getting multiple perspectives.
However, this means you need to be consistent and thoughtful about who
interviews with whom. If Bob, Charlene, and Dory interviewed and liked
comparisons.

Xavier, but Ebert, Frank, and Georgia interviewed and liked Zan, how to
decide whom to hire? This is a waste of eight people’s time.
Four people is about the right size for an interview committee. Ideally,
the interviewing committee is diverse. If you’re a female candidate, it can
be off-putting if everyone who interviews you is male. If you’re an
underrepresented minority, it can be frustrating if everyone who interviews
you is of the same ethnicity. It’s also helpful if at least one of the
interviewers is on another team. This prevents “desperation hiring.” When
there’s a “hole” on a team, people become so eager to fill the position that
they ignore warning signals. Somebody who isn’t feeling the pain of the
hole on the team as acutely is more likely to point out these danger signs.
Casual interviews reveal more about team fit than formal ones. I am sure that there is

good interview training out there somewhere, but I’ve never encountered it.
My experience is that interviewing is a learning-by-doing skill. Let people
develop their own style. I love stories, so my whole interview technique is
just to ask people to “give me the oral version of your résumé.”
Another good practice is to have people intentionally create more casual
moments—take candidates to lunch, walk them to the car. Ask the
receptionist and schedulers if they had any reaction to the candidate. In
unguarded moments, candidates will do or say revealing things. An
important part of my team’s culture was Bob Sutton’s “No Assholes” rule.
One candidate I was about to hire was so rude to the scheduler that she
cried. Another candidate was rude to a waiter. I didn’t hire either of them.
Another picked up napkins he hadn’t dropped that were littering the floor. I
did hire him. An executive I know who’s a great hirer always walks
candidates to the car. Here are a few of the things she’s learned on these
walks: one candidate divulged a drug habit, another bragged about his
dominance at home with his family and said he had to keep his “women in
line,” another joked about how he liked to gossip about other colleagues
and clients at lunch.

Make interviews productive by jotting down your thoughts right away. Write down

your interview feedback; doing that is as clarifying for you as it is for the
rest of the committee, and it will result in better hiring decisions. Write
down your thoughts on each of the skills, if you’re interviewing for skills,
as well as for each of the team fit criteria identified.
I recently interviewed a candidate who was both charming and had an
impressive résumé, but something was bothering me. I put my finger on it
only when I sat down to write interview feedback: he had a tendency to
make big assertions without having precise details at his fingertips. He
talked about Company X’s system as “able to scale to infinity,” but when I
pressed him he said they could handle a few million rows of data a day—
hardly infinity, or even that impressive. He was also a little vague on what
exactly Company X was doing to drive revenue, and what his role in
driving it was.
I know, you’re busy and you don’t have time to write everything down.
Here’s a tip: schedule an hour, interview for forty-five minutes, and write
for fifteen. This arrangement will force you to have a more focused
interview and to make a better recommendation about whom to hire.
In-person debrief/decision: if you’re not dying to hire the person, don’t make an offer.

The best advice I ever got for hiring somebody is this: if you’re not dying to
hire somebody, don’t make an offer. And, even if you are dying to hire
somebody, allow yourself to be overruled by the other interviewers who
feel strongly the person should not be hired. In general, a bias toward no is
useful when hiring.
Once three to four candidates have been interviewed for a role, the
hiring committee should meet to discuss each one. These in-person
conversations take real discipline to schedule, but if you believe that it
makes sense to have multiple people interview each candidate, then talking
about your assessments face to face is the fastest and soundest way to make
a good decision.

Making all feedback visible to all interviewers after they’ve submitted
theirs will help these hiring-committee meetings go more quickly, but it will
require more prep from each person. A good way to ensure that everyone is
on the same page is to schedule a one-hour meeting with a fifteen-minute
“study hall” time at the beginning so everyone can read everyone else’s
feedback. If run well, the meeting should generally end early. If your team
is empowered to make a decision without further ado, and if you are dying
to hire the person and nobody has overruled you, do it immediately!! If not,
make your recommendation to the powers that be at your company, and
push them to make a decision fast.

FIRING
A necessary evil
SOME COMPANIES DON’T invest much time in the hiring process, on the theory

that it’s easy to fire people. This is a big mistake. Firing people is not easy,
either emotionally or legally. At companies where it’s too easy to fire
people, bad/unfair firing decisions get made, with the result that even
people who are great at their jobs start to get spooked. When people feel
that kind of fear, they start to avoid taking risks. They learn less, they grow
less, they innovate less, they become less than they could be. This is the
opposite of personal growth management.
Other companies make the opposite mistake: they make firing people
damn near impossible. In these companies, bosses have one hand tied
behind their backs. Some address performance issues by foisting failing
team members on unsuspecting colleagues, which creates bizarre office
politics. Those who are doing the best work also wind up having to carry
people who are not able to contribute—and often quit in frustration as a
result. Those who are not able to contribute realize it doesn’t really matter
and stop even trying. The gravitational pull of organizational mediocrity
sets in.

Firing people is hard, and it ought to be hard. But if you do three things,
you can make it far, far easier on the person you are firing—as well as on
yourself and your team.
Don’t wait too long
Virtually all managers I’ve ever worked with have been far too slow to
admit when somebody on their team is starting to underperform. They don’t
admit it to themselves, let alone to their bosses or to HR. When I teach
management classes, I often ask people to put names in quadrants on the
talent management grid. I tell them there are no consequences. They don’t
have to share this with anyone. This is a purely mental exercise. After
everyone has finished I ask, “How many of you think there are some
underperformers at this company?” Generally, all the hands go up. Then I
ask, “How many of you put a single name in one of the two ‘poor
performance’ boxes?” Generally, only a couple of hands go up. A few
people will laugh, but everyone is always very eager to move on. I force
them to sit there until everyone has put names in the underperforming
boxes.
There are four very good reasons to push yourself to identify
underperformance early. One, to be fair to the person who’s failing. If you
identify a problem early, you give the person time to address it. You also
reduce the shock if they can’t or won’t address it and you wind up having to

fire the person. Two, to be fair to your company. If you identify and address
problems early enough, you dramatically reduce the risk of getting sued or
the chance that you’ll have to keep them on the payroll for months of
painful legal documentation. Three, to be fair to yourself. When you give
somebody a good rating one quarter and fire them the next, word gets
around, and it undermines trust with everyone else. Not to mention that you
risk being sued by the fired employee. Although it is time-consuming and
unpleasant to address performance problems, it takes a lot more time and is
far more unpleasant to deal with a lawsuit. Four, and most importantly, you
want to address underperformance early to be fair to the people who are
performing really well. Tolerating bad work is unfair to the people who are
doing excellent work.
Don’t make the decision unilaterally
Once you’ve identified performance issues, take the time to get advice
from your boss, to calibrate with your peers (if appropriate), and to get help
from HR. Don’t take the attitude that this is your decision alone. You don’t
want to fire a person out of anger, and you don’t want to fail to fire a person
out of denial. Many people get lost in their own heads around this highly
charged issue; your boss and your peers can help you think more clearly.
Good HR people can not only help you think more clearly but also make
sure you do it in a way that won’t get you or the company sued.
In an ideal world, your company has somebody in HR whose job it is to
help you document properly. (If you run a company, identify such a
person!) If that is not the case, find an employment lawyer or a seasoned
HR person or an experienced manager and ask them for help. Don’t just ask
for advice; get them to edit what you write. Advice is far too abstract. I’ve
seen dozens of cases where a manager has been advised how to write a
Performance Improvement Plan (PIP). They are told to make it fair but not
too easy, to make sure that it really addresses the performance issue. The
managers hear the “fair” part but ignore the “not too easy” part. The person

passes the PIP without addressing the core issue, and the performance
problem drags on for another three or six months.
As a boss, you need to write the emails and other documents like PIPs—
but make sure that somebody who has done this before edits them carefully.
It’s going to take time—a lot more time than you want to spend on it.
Again, it’s worth taking the time because being sued is far worse!
Give a damn
Don’t get too caught up in all the HR/legal advice, though. Take a deep
breath and a big step back. You have a relationship with the person you’re
about to fire. You still give a damn about this person. Think hard about how
to do it in a way that will make it easiest on them—even if it makes it
harder on you, or if you have to take some risks.
When I was at Juice, I had to fire somebody and was worried it would
be contentious. I got a bunch of advice from our lawyer about how to do it
(we had no HR department). A lot of it was really helpful, but the lawyer
kept advising me to hire a security guard to walk the person out. I knew the
person I was firing would feel ashamed if I did it this way, and that it would
make him more likely to go ballistic. “What is the risk of not walking him
out?” I asked the lawyer. “He might go ballistic,” she said. I realized I was
likely to cause the very thing I was trying to prevent by following legal
advice, so I did the opposite. I let him go back in, say good-bye on his own
terms. He thanked me for that later, and I always had the feeling that
following my gut instead of the legal advice spared everybody a lot of
heartache—and probably avoided a lawsuit.
When you have to fire people, do it with humility. Remember, the
reason you have to fire them is not that they suck. It’s not even that they
suck at this job. It’s that this job—the job you gave them—sucks for them.
Follow up

I usually email people about a month after I’ve fired them to check in. I
try to keep my ear to the ground about jobs they might be well-suited for.
But even if I don’t have anything to offer, I will reach out. Often, I’m the
last person they want to hear from, and so if I don’t hear back I don’t push
it, and I don’t blame them. But sometimes the person is happy to take a
walk, share a meal, or just have a quick exchange. I’ll never forget one walk
I took with a man who thanked me profusely for having fired him, and
whose wife had asked him to pass along her thanks as well. It turned out
that leaving the job was not just good for his career; it was also good for his
marriage and for his relationship with his children.
It’s hard to fire people, but it’s hard to quit, too. Sometimes it’s your job
as the boss to be Radically Candid when something’s just not working.

PROMOTIONS
Be fair
FEW THINGS CAN create a sense of injustice on a team like having a boss who

promotes based on favoritism, or a manager who promotes people much
faster than the manager sitting in the next office. Yet when a few managers
get together to make sure their promotions are fair, the politics can get ugly
very quickly. Disagreements can become overly personalized, silent
disagreement can become toxic, and bizarre backroom bartering occurs
—“I’ll support your undeserving person if you’ll support mine.” A grudge
held from the last cycle may kill the promotion of an otherwise deserving
person the next time around.
Google’s engineering team solved these problems with promotion
committees, which were assembled off-site for one day twice a year. They
debated the promotions of other people’s direct reports, not their own, based
on a packet of relatively objective information about each person’s
accomplishments. The debates were about the merits of a person’s
promotion, not “my person” versus “your person.” But most importantly,
the process was a solution to the age-old problem of manager favoritism. As
a result, no engineer has ever been promoted at Google just by ass-kissing

alone. (Unfortunately, other teams at Google don’t have as rigorous a
promotion process as engineering does.)

That’s not to say Google’s system is perfect. It tends to reward people
who do the most visible projects rather than those who make important
breakthroughs behind the scenes. And recommendations from some people
go further than they ought to. But it’s still the best process I’ve seen, and
worth emulating.
Even if your company doesn’t go to these lengths to make promotions
fair, you can confer with your peers, or if you’re a boss of bosses you can
require all your reports to calibrate their promotion plans with one another
before any promotions get approved. Here are some tips for preventing the
politics described above from ruining your calibration meetings.
Prepare. Ask everyone on your team to send in a list of people they are

planning to promote, together with a justification. If you have an HR
partner, ask that person to organize all names and justifications by level and
pull together a presentation that makes the information easy to grasp and
absorb. Go into the meeting having reviewed all the information and being
prepared with your own point of view on each promotion—but also with an
open mind.

Manage the time carefully, and don’t let arguments go on too long. Go through all

promotions by level, most senior to least. Plan for the more senior
promotions to take up more time per person than more junior promotions,
but don’t let them take up all the time. When arguments go on too long,
either make the call yourself on the spot, or ask people to continue the
debate offline and come to you with a recommendation or a stalemate for
you to resolve.
Get enough sleep the day before, exercise that morning, and eat a good breakfast. You

are going to need to be calm and, if possible, funny that day. Encourage
your whole team to do the same.
When it’s all done, acknowledge how hard these conversations are. Plan some sort of

clear-the-air activity—a walk together, etc. In general I don’t recommend
mixing alcohol and work, but if there is a time to go for a drink together,
this is it.
If neither your company nor your boss seem concerned with making
sure that promotions are fair, you can always propose to your peers that you
get together and calibrate. If they won’t, you can still look at the people
you’re planning to promote, look at other people who are at the company,
and do a sanity check. You don’t do people any favors by promoting them
when the rest of the team feels they don’t really deserve it.

REWARD YOUR ROCK STARS
Don’t give all the glory to the superstars

Avoid promotion/status obsession
I once became totally paralyzed over my keyboard when trying to write
the email I was supposed to send out to my whole team at Google to
celebrate promotions. Ten years later, I finally understand what was wrong:
I shouldn’t have been writing that email at all. Announcing promotions

breeds unhealthy competition for the wrong things: documentation of status
rather than development of skill.
Most promotions come with increased salary, responsibility, and, in
some companies, equity. That is a lot of external validation. Presumably, the
people getting promoted have been praised in public for the work they’ve
done along the path to getting the promotion. But when there are big public
celebrations of promotions, the costs in terms of the organization’s focus on
hierarchy often outweigh the benefits of publicly recognizing those being
promoted.
What about making roles clear and transparent? If a promotion includes
a change of role, then announce it. But not every change of role signifies a
promotion, and not every promotion signifies a change of role. Focus on the
work the person is doing, not the status they’ve achieved in the company
for doing it.

What about public praise? Yes, by all means, praise in public. But think
carefully about what you are praising. Praise the things you want more of:
high-quality work, mind-boggling innovation, amazing efficiency, selfless
teamwork, and so on. Do you really want such a focus on promotions? If
not, then don’t make such a big deal of them.
Say “thank-you”

Jim Ottaway, former SVP and Board Director of Dow Jones, once told
me he’d been astounded to find a thank-you note he’d written a decade
earlier still stuck on the wall of an employee’s office. Realizing how much
it meant, he wished he’d written a lot more notes like that. The importance
of the simplest things, like thank-yous, are most often forgotten by bosses—
even good bosses.
A thank-you goes beyond praise. Praise expresses admiration for great
work. A thank-you expresses personal gratitude. In the case of a thank-you,
you are explaining not just why the work matters, but why it matters to you.
Take a moment to say thank-you. Do it in person, and do it in writing.
Sometimes the thank-you has more meaning in private, other times in
public. It rarely hurts to do both.
Gurus
Another great way to highlight how great people are at a job is to
acknowledge them as gurus in their area of expertise. You might
acknowledge their mastery by putting the person in charge of teaching
others the skill. Give them a couple of months to develop a class, to really
think about how to teach what they know. This can be deeply satisfying for
the guru, and enormously productive for your team. Not everybody likes to
teach, though, so make sure this is a reward not a punishment. Figure out
another way to establish the person as the master in their field if they don’t
enjoy teaching.
Public presentations
Again, one of the most common complaints from people who do
excellent work and are on a gradual growth trajectory is that they feel
invisible. A simple way to solve this is to give people on your team who
focus on tasks that are important but under-recognized or misunderstood an
opportunity to explain their work to their colleagues.

AVOID ABSENTEE MANAGEMENT AND
MICROMANAGEMENT
TO HELP YOU figure out when you’re being a good partner rather than

slipping into micromanagement or absentee management, I’ve developed a
simple chart. I hope it will help you partner better with the people who
report to you. One of the best ways to keep the people on your team
engaged is by partnering actively with them.
ABSENTEE
MANAGEMENT

PARTNERSHIP

Hands-off, ears off, mouth Hands-on, ears on, mouth
off.
off.

MICROMANAGEMENT
Hands-on, ears off, mouth on.

Lacks curiosity. Doesn’t
want to know.

Displays curiosity.
Lacks curiosity. Pretends to know all.
Recognizes when they need
to know more.

Doesn’t listen. Says
nothing.

Listens. Asks why.

Is afraid of any details.

Asks about relevant details. Gets lost in the details.

Has no idea what’s going
on.

Is informed because handson.

Asks for make-work presentations,
reports, and updates.

Sets no goals.

Leads collaborative goalsetting.

Sets goals arbitrarily.

Remains unaware of
problems.

Listens to problems. Predicts Tells people how to solve problems
problems. Brainstorms
without fully understanding them.
solutions.

Doesn’t listen. Tells how.

Causes collateral damage by Removes obstacles and
Tells people how to remove
tripping on grenades
defuses explosive situations. obstacles/defuse situations, but watches
unawares.
from a safe distance.
Is ignorant of both the
Shares what they know; asks Pretends to know when they don’t.
questions and the answers. questions when they don’t
Is unaware of context.

Shares relevant context.

Hoards information.

SUMMARY
THERE ARE FEW pleasures greater than being part of a team where everyone

loves their job and loves working together. You can build a team like that if
you have career conversations with each of the people on your team, create
growth-management plans for each person who works for you once a year,
hire the right people, fire the appropriate people, promote the right people,
and reward the people who are doing great work but who shouldn’t be
promoted, and offer yourself as a partner to your direct reports. It’s
absolutely within your power to build a team that looks forward to coming
to work every day. Together you will accomplish things that you could
never do individually, while each of you individually takes a step in the
direction of your dreams.

8.
RESULTS
Things you can do to get stuff done together
—faster
THE ULTIMATE GOAL OF RADICAL Candor is to achieve results collaboratively

that you could never achieve individually. You’ve created a culture of
guidance. You’ve created an exemplary team that embodies the Radical
Candor ethos of caring personally and challenging directly. As a result, the
team is firing on all cylinders; and perhaps most importantly, it has
developed a self-correcting quality whereby most problems are solved
before you are even aware of them. It’s not time to buy the yacht and sail
off to the Caribbean, though. Now you get to use the gift of Radical Candor
—all that freed-up time and energy—to focus your team on achieving great
results.
Neuroscientist and academic Stephen Kosslyn once gave a talk in which
he described how people who work together on a team become like “mental
prostheses” for each other. What one person doesn’t enjoy and isn’t good at
is what another person loves and excels at. Together, they are “better,
stronger, faster.” Getting better, stronger, and faster in this case means
observing the steps of the GSD wheel described in Chapter Four. Your role
will to be to encourage that process of listening, clarifying, debating,

deciding, persuading, and executing to the point that it’s almost as if your
team shares one mind when it comes to completing projects, and then
learning from their results. This is not true just at high-tech Silicon Valley
companies. I recently talked to a man who was responsible for training new
managers at New Jersey Transit. I asked him what was the first thing they
taught. “Don’t start by bossing people. They’ll just hate you. Start by
listening to them.”
One of your most important responsibilities to keep everything moving
smoothly is to decide who needs to communicate with whom and how
frequently. This means meetings. Obviously, every meeting comes with a
significant cost—time—so it is important to minimize the duration,
frequency and number of people required to attend. The most important of
these meetings is the 1:1 with each of your direct reports.
1. 1:1 Conversations
2. Staff Meetings
3. Think Time
4. “Big Debate” Meetings
5. “Big Decision” Meetings
6. All-Hands Meetings
7. Meeting-Free Zones
8. Kanban Boards
9. Walk Around
10. Be Conscious of Culture

1:1 CONVERSATIONS
Employees set the agenda, you listen and help them clarify
1:1S ARE YOUR must-do meetings, your single best opportunity to listen,

really listen, to the people on your team to make sure you understand their
perspective on what’s working and what’s not working. These meetings also
provide an opportunity to get to know your direct reports—to move up on

the “care personally” dimension of the Radical Candor framework.
Remember: this is not the place to dump all of the criticism you’ve been
saving up. That should come in those two- to three-minute impromptu
conversations that you’ve already been having!

The purpose of a 1:1 meeting is to listen and clarify—to understand
what direction each person working for you wants to head in, and what is
blocking them. Sheryl once quickly helped me in a 1:1 meeting solve a
problem that was enormously important to me and had seemed
insurmountable until we talked. I was managing teams in ten different cities
around the world and wanted to travel to each of them. At the same time, I
was forty and trying to start a family. It’s pretty hard to get pregnant when
you’re five thousand miles away from your husband. What to do? I brought
my dilemma to Sheryl. “Oh, that’s easy!” she said. I was all ears. “You
can’t. And you don’t have any time to waste. You need to make getting
pregnant your top priority.” I was immensely relieved. It had seemed
impossible to travel and get pregnant at the same time, and I was glad to
hear Sheryl say what I had felt. But I also felt crestfallen. Did this mean I
couldn’t do my job? Of course not! “Remember that global off-site meeting
your team wanted but we had a hard time getting budget for?” Sheryl asked.
“Let’s take another crack at getting the budget. That way you can fly

everybody here. They want to come, and you don’t want to go. Seems like a
win-win.”
Here are a few things you can do to make sure you and each of your
reports are getting the most out of these 1:1 meetings:
Mind-set
Your mind-set will go a long way in determining how well the 1:1s go. I
found that when I quit thinking of them as meetings and began treating
them as if I were having lunch or coffee with somebody I was eager to get
to know better, they ended up yielding much better conversations. If
scheduling them over a meal helps, make them periodic lunches. If you and
your direct report like to walk and there’s a good place to take a walk near
the office, make them walking meetings. If you are a morning person,
schedule them in the morning. If you are a person who has an energy dip at
2 P.M., don’t schedule them at 2 P.M. You have a lot of meetings, so you can
optimize the 1:1 time and location for your energy. Just don’t be a jerk
about it. You may like to wake up at 5 A.M. and go to the gym. Don’t expect
the people who work for you to meet you there.
Frequency
Time doesn’t scale, but it’s also vital to relationships. 1:1s should be a
natural bottleneck that determines how many direct reports a boss can have.
I like to meet with each person who works directly for me for fifty minutes
a week. But I can’t bear more than about five hours of 1:1 time in my
calendar. Listening is hard work, and I don’t have an endless capacity for it
every day. So I like to limit myself to five direct reports. When people are
remote, I make sure that those conversations happen over video conference,
and I try to supplement them with more frequent quick check-ins.
This is not realistic for a lot of companies—including some of the ones
where I’ve worked. If you have ten direct reports, I’d shift 1:1s to twentyfive minutes a week. Plenty of people I know have twenty direct reports,

and there’s nothing they can do about it. It’s just the nature of the way their
companies are managed. If you’re in that situation, I recommend twentyfive minutes every other week with each direct report. Also, see if you can
create some leadership opportunities for the people who work for you and
reduce the number of direct reports you have.
Finally, to avoid meeting proliferation, I recommend that managers use
the 1:1 time to have “career conversations” (see chapter seven) and, if
relevant, to do formal performance reviews.
Show up!
Probably the most important advice for 1:1s is just to show up. In an
ideal world, you have less than ten direct reports so that you can have a
weekly 1:1 with each of them. Even in that ideal world, between your travel
schedule, the fact that you will inevitably get sick sometimes, and the
occasional vacation, you will have to cancel at least two or three out of
thirteen scheduled 1:1s. If you reserve some of those slots for special 1:1s
(i.e., performance reviews, soliciting feedback, “career conversations”), you
will have only seven or eight “regular” 1:1s per quarter. And if your world
is not ideal and you have more than ten direct reports, you probably have
1:1s every other week. That means you’re having three or four 1:1s with
each of your direct reports per quarter. So, no matter what fires erupt in
your day, do not cancel your 1:1s.
Your direct report’s agenda, not yours
When your direct reports own and set the agenda for their 1:1s, they’re
more productive, because they allow you to listen to what matters to them.
However, I recommend setting basic expectations for the agenda and how
it’s delivered. Do you even want a structured agenda? If you do, and you
want to see it in advance, say so. If you don’t, and you won’t even look at it
in advance, set expectations accordingly. Are you OK if they come in with a
set of bulleted items jotted on a napkin, or do you prefer they keep it in a

shared document so you can refer back to it? Whether you want a structured
agenda or you prefer a more free-flowing meeting, the agenda itself should
be directed by your direct report, not you. Your job is to hold people
accountable when they come unprepared—or to decide that it’s fine to have
an agenda-less 1:1 from time to time.
Some good follow-up questions
Here are some follow-up questions you can ask to show not only that
you are listening but that you care and want to help, and to identify the gaps
between what people are doing, what they think they ought to be doing, and
what they want to be doing:
“Why?”
“How can I help?”
“What can I do or stop doing that would make this easier?”
“What wakes you up at night?”
“What are you working on that you don’t want to work on?”
“Do you not want to work on it because you aren’t interested or because you think it’s not
important?”
“What can you do to stop working on it?”
“What are you not working on that you do want to work on?”
“Why are you not working on it?”
“What can you do to start working on it?”
“How do you feel about the priorities of the teams you’re dependent on?”
“What are they working on that seems unimportant or even counterproductive?”
“What are they not doing that you wish they would do?”
“Have you talked to these other teams directly about your concerns? If not, why not?”
(Important note: the goal here is to encourage the people to raise the issue directly with each
other, not to solve the problem for them. See “Prevent Backstabbing” in chapter six.)

Encourage new ideas in the 1:1.

It’s worth keeping Jony Ive’s quote, “new ideas are fragile,” top of mind
before a 1:1. This meeting should be a safe place for people to nurture new
ideas before they are submitted to the rough-and-tumble of debate. Help
them clarify both their thinking about these ideas and their understanding of
the people to whom they need to communicate these ideas. The ideas may
need to be described in one way for an engineer and another for a
salesperson. Here are some questions that you can use to nurture new ideas
by pushing people to be clearer:
“What do you need to develop that idea further so that it’s ready to discuss with the broader
team? How can I help?”
“I think you’re on to something, but it’s still not clear to me. Can you try explaining it again?”
“Let’s wrestle some more with it, OK?”
“I understand what you mean, but I don’t think others will. How can you explain it so it will
be easier for them to understand?”
“I don’t think ‘so-and-so’ will understand this. Can you explain it again to make it clearer
specifically for them?”
“Is the problem really that they are too stupid to understand, or is it that you are not
explaining it clearly enough?”

Signs you’ll get from 1:1s that you’re failing as a boss
1:1s are valuable meetings for your direct reports to share their thinking
with you and to decide what direction to proceed with their work. They are
also valuable meetings for you, because these meetings are where you’ll get
your first early warning signs that you are failing as a boss. Here are some
sure signals:
Cancellations. If people who report to you cancel 1:1s too often, it’s a sign

your partnership is not fruitful for them, or that you’re using it
inappropriately to dispose of criticism you’ve been stockpiling.
Updates. If people just give you updates that could simply be emailed to

you, encourage them to use the time more constructively.

Good news only. If you hear only good news, it’s a sign people don’t feel

comfortable coming to you with their problems, or they think you won’t or
can’t help. In these cases, you need to ask explicitly for the bad news. Don’t
let the issue drop till you hear some.
No criticism. If they never criticize you, you’re not good enough at getting

guidance from your team. Remember that phrase: “What could I do or stop
doing that would make it easier to work with me?”
No agenda. If they consistently come with no topics to discuss, it might

mean that they are overwhelmed, that they don’t understand the purpose of
the meeting, or that they don’t consider it useful. Be direct but polite: “This
is your time, but you don’t seem to come with much to talk about. Can you
tell me why?”

STAFF MEETINGS
Review metrics, study hall updates, and identify (but do not make) key decisions
LITERALLY EVERY CEO, middle manager, and first-time manager I have ever

worked with has struggled to figure out how to run a productive staff
meeting with their direct reports. All too often, the person leading the
meeting comes to dread it; attendees view it as a waste of time; and those
excluded feel sad and bad and left out. Although bloated staff meetings can
be a drain on people’s time and energy, the opposite is also true; a well-run
meeting can save you time by alerting you to problems, sharing updates
efficiently, and getting you all on the same page about what the week’s
shared priorities are.
An effective staff meeting has three goals: it reviews how things have
gone the previous week, allows people to share important updates, and
forces the team to clarify the most important decisions and debates for the
coming week. That’s it. It shouldn’t be the place to have debates or make
decisions. Your job is to establish a consistent agenda, insist that people

stick to it, and corral people who go on for too long or who go off on
tangents.

Here’s the agenda that I’ve found to be most effective:

■ Learn: review key metrics (twenty minutes)
■ Listen: put updates in a shared document (fifteen minutes)
■ Clarify: identify key decisions & debates (thirty minutes)
Learn: review key metrics (twenty minutes). What went well that week, and

why? What went badly, and why? This will go best if you come up with a
dashboard of key metrics to review. By “dashboard” I don’t mean some
super sophisticated system set up by an IT department. I mean a spreadsheet
with a few numbers on it. What are the most important activities and results
you see each week that let you know if you are on track to achieving your
goals? You can design the dashboard yourself; you don’t need a corporate
infrastructure to do it for you. Ideally it’s updated automatically; if that’s
not possible, make sure everyone working for you updates their part the
night before the staff meeting. If necessary, check it yourself and hound
them till they get the updates in. If you can, put the dashboard in a place

where the whole team can see it. Notes from this conversation should
almost always be made public.
Listen: put updates in a shared document during a “study hall” (15 minutes). One of

the most challenging aspects of managing a team is how to keep everyone
abreast of what everyone else is doing so that they can flag areas of concern
or overlap without wasting a great deal of time. Updates are different from
key metrics. Updates include things that would never make it into the
dashboard, like, “We need to change our goals for this project,” “I am
thinking of doing a re-org,” “I’m starting to think I need to fire so-and-so,”
or “I have to have surgery next month and will be out for three weeks.”
Some leaders have staff meetings that run for multiple hours to share
this sort of information. Almost everybody hates long meetings, so some go
the other direction and set up a public document where everyone jots down
the key things they did last week and what they plan to do next week.
Google did this and called these updates “snippets.”
In theory, a snippets system for updates is easy to use and avoids
interminable staff meetings; after all, it just takes a few minutes to write
your own snippets and a few minutes more to read everyone else’s. In
practice, however, many people have enormous resistance to writing their
snippets, and when some people don’t do them, the whole system falls
apart. I found that although I was all for avoiding an endless staff meeting, I
was also one of those people who find it disproportionately burdensome to
take the five minutes to input my snippets. For a while, I forced myself to
do it anyway, but when I realized I wasn’t alone, I decided to find a
different solution. I made time for us all to do it in my staff meeting. This
worked much better.
Here’s the way study hall snippets work. Have everybody take five to
seven minutes to write down the three to five things that they or their team
did that week that others need to know about, and five to seven minutes to
read everybody else’s updates. Don’t allow side conversations—require that
follow-up questions be handled after the meeting. This simple rule will save

enormous amounts of wasted time in your staff meeting. If you don’t do
this, most of the meeting will consist of two or three people talking while
the rest watch on, uninterested.
Snippets works best with a shared document editable by multiple people
simultaneously. You can use Google Docs, Office 365, Evernote. If your
staff doesn’t have laptops or smartphones, you can use paper and pen—
everyone jots their notes down on a piece of paper, and then you do a round
robin with the pieces of paper.
If you are a boss of bosses, these snippets should be made public to the
broader team. That means people can’t include things that need to be kept
confidential: an individual’s performance problems, contemplated salary
adjustments, etc. You may want to keep a “confidential snippets” doc for
your team, but make sure there are not too many items here. Most things
you discuss should be shared with the broader team.
Clarify: identify key decisions/debates (30 minutes). What are the one or two most

important decisions and the single most important debate your team needs
to take on that week? If your team is fewer than twenty or so people, you
can probably just list them and decide/debate in an ad hoc way.
If your team is bigger than twenty or so people, you will want to be
more formal. Put these topics on the agendas of separate “big decision” and
“big debate” meetings and identify owners for each. This may feel like
meeting proliferation, but it’s actually a way to get you out of meetings and
get the people who want to be included in debates and decisions present for
them. The debate and decision owners will generally not be you or the
people reporting to you. These separate meetings are a way for you to
delegate debates and decisions. Delegating debates and decisions pushes
them into the facts, and avoids thinking that is hierarchical (and therefore
disconnected from the details/reality).
The agenda for these two meetings should be communicated to the
broader team. Anyone who wants to attend them is free to. At first they will
probably be too big, but pretty soon people will go only if they really want

or need to be there. Most people hate to be excluded from decisions
relevant to them, but they hate attending meetings that are irrelevant to
them even more. With a little transparency, it all sorts itself out.

THINK TIME
Block time to think, and hold that time sacred
YOU’VE JUST READ about adding 1:1 meetings and a staff meeting to your

calendar. You’ll probably have to attend some “big debate” and “big
decision” meetings. In addition to all these regularly planned meetings,
people are going to want to talk to you about this or that; urgent matters will
arise that you must deal with. When are you supposed to find time to clarify
your own thinking, or to help the people who work for you clarify theirs? If
you don’t take some action, you will hardly have time to go to the bathroom
or grab water, let alone food. You will be tyrannized by your calendar. The
only quiet moment to think you’ll ever get is at home, late at night, when
you really should be sleeping.
An extremely successful—and busy—CEO I know fought this by
blocking two hours of think time on his calendar every day. He wouldn’t
move it for anyone. Once the president (I won’t say which country) wanted
to meet with him. The president didn’t have any particular agenda, but most
people would have taken the meeting for curiosity’s sake. But not this CEO.
Why? It would have interfered with think time. An enormously successful
newspaper executive recounted walking into his CEO’s office and seeing
him leaning back in his chair just staring out at the sky. When he asked the
CEO what he was daydreaming about, it turned out to be the idea that
pivoted the company for the next decade.

It’s not just CEOs who can pull this off. I did it when I worked as a
middle manager at Google. My advice is that you schedule in some think
time, and hold that think time sacred. Let people know that they cannot ever
schedule over it. Get really, seriously angry if they try. Encourage everyone
on your team to do the same.

“BIG DEBATE” MEETINGS
Lower the tension by making it clear that you are debating, not deciding.
“BIG DEBATE” MEETINGS are reserved for debate, but not decisions, on major

issues facing the team. They serve three purposes:
They lower tension. At least part of the friction and frustration in a lot of

meetings results from the fact that half the room thinks they are there to
make a decision, the other half to debate. The would-be deciders are furious
that the debaters don’t seem to be driving toward an answer. The would-be
debaters are furious that the deciders are refusing to think things through
carefully enough, to consider every angle of the argument. When everybody
knows that the meeting will end with no decision, this source of tension is
eliminated.

They allow you to slow down key decisions when appropriate. When a topic is really

important and there’s a lot of disagreement about how to proceed, friction
and frustration ensue. To avoid this, teams sometimes rush into a decision
before they have really thought it through or gotten sufficient input. Putting
a topic like that on the debate agenda forces a team to keep wrestling with
it, digging up needed information, getting expert input, or just thinking
more deeply.
They foster a larger culture of debate. Debate should occur constantly on a

well-functioning team. Having these meetings regularly and seeking topics
for them can help build the muscle and tolerance for discussion and
dissension. When having a “bet the company” debate—“Should we enter a
new, risky market that requires an enormous investment?”—it’s important
for stakeholders to participate in a number of open-ended debates. Having
regular debates—arguments, even—also lowers tension because it prevents
explosive fights. The principle of “self-organizing criticality”—a lot of little
corrections create stability but one huge correction creates catastrophe—
applies to human relationships as much as it does to markets.
* * *

THE LOGISTICS OF the “big debate” meeting should be pretty simple. After

your staff meeting, the topic, owner, and participants for big debate should
be sent out to the broader team (assuming you’re managing managers) as
well as to people on other teams who are working with your team. The only
people required to participate in the debate should be those you identified in
your staff meeting. But anyone should be able to attend/observe a “big
debate” meeting. The debate “owner” appoints somebody to take notes and
send them out to all relevant parties.
The norms of these meetings are also pretty straightforward. Make it
clear that everyone must check egos at the door of this meeting. The goal of
debate is to work together to come up with the best answer. There should be
no “winners” or “losers.” A good norm is to ask participants to switch roles
halfway through each debate. This makes sure that people are listening to
each other, and helps them keep focused on coming up with the best answer
and letting go of egos/positions.
The sole product of the debate should be a careful summary of the facts
and issues that emerged, a clearer definition of the choices going forward,
and a recommendation to keep debating or to move on to a decision.

“BIG DECISION” MEETINGS
Push decisions into the facts, pull facts into the decisions, and keep egos at bay

typically but not always follow a big debate
meeting. They serve two important roles. The first is obvious: to make
important decisions. The second, though, is subtler. It can be hard to figure
out when to stop debating and start deciding. I have never discovered any
absolute principles to answer that question. The simple act of being explicit
and conscious about when I’m deciding versus when I’m debating is the
single most helpful way to figure out when a decision really needs to be
made. That’s the main reason why I recommend two separate meetings.
“BIG DECISION” MEETINGS

The logistics and norms of these meetings are the same as those of the
“big debate” meetings. The leader of the meeting is the “decider,” whom
you will have appointed in your staff meeting. The only people required to
attend are those identified in your staff meeting, but anyone can attend.
Notes should be taken and made available to all relevant parties. Check
egos at the door. No winners or losers. The product of “big decision”
meetings is a careful summary of the meeting distributed to all relevant
parties. It’s important that the decisions are final, otherwise they’ll always
be appealed and will really be debates, not decisions.
You’ll need to abide by the decisions made in these meetings just like
everyone else. If you know it’s a topic you have strong opinions on, feel
free to either attend the meeting or to let the decider know you have veto
power. If you have veto power, the decider should send the decision to you
to approve or disapprove before the notes go out more broadly. Use this
power sparingly, though, or the meetings will become meaningless.

ALL-HANDS MEETINGS
Bring others along
IF YOU HAVE a team of ten or fewer people, you probably don’t need to

schedule a separate meeting to make sure everyone is persuaded that the
right decisions have been made. However, as your team gets bigger, you

need to start thinking about how to bring everyone along. It’s shocking how
fast the decisions that some people make start to seem mysterious or even
nefarious to people who weren’t close to the process. If your team is one
hundred or more people, a regular all-hands meeting can really help to get
broad buy-in on the decisions being made—and also to learn about dissent.
Silicon Valley is big on company-wide all-hands meetings. Apple’s is
called Town Hall, Dropbox’s is Whiskey Friday, Google’s is TGIF,
Twitter’s is Tea Time. There’s something to be learned from how all-hands
meetings are done in Silicon Valley, and why.
These meetings usually include two parts: presentations to persuade
people that the company is making good decisions and headed in the right
direction, and Q&As conducted so leaders can hear dissent and address it
head-on. When handled well, the answers the leaders give to the questions,
which are often quite challenging, are usually more persuasive than the
presentations.

One of the best all-hands meetings I ever observed was the Friday after
Google acquired Keyhole, the company whose technology powered Google
Earth. It was fun partly because Larry and Sergey were so exuberant about
the acquisition, like kids with a cool new toy. But it was also the best
explanation of what they meant by “organize all the world’s information.”

This wasn’t just about Web sites and books—they meant, literally, all the
world’s information! The excitement in the meeting was palpable.
The presentations typically focus on one or two initiatives that are
especially exciting and important. They are meant to inform everyone of
broader priorities, and to get their buy-in. The presentations are generally
done by the team working on the initiative. This practice at Google was
important; it built the “persuade” muscle throughout the company. Also,
people usually loved presenting at these meetings. “Your team wants the
stage? Show them the stage!”
Q&A is usually handled by the CEO/founders and allows them to learn
what people really think, and so it generally falls to them to answer these
often unpleasant, challenging, or awkward questions. The way that these
questions get answered is enormously important to persuading a lot of
people at once that the right decisions are being made the right way.
I always admired the way Larry Page and Sergey Brin handled Q&As at
Google’s TGIF meetings. Larry and Sergey took on all sorts of questions,
week after week, and they never used that over-prepped, over-messaged
tone that CEOs sometimes fall into. Their answers were invariably
spontaneous, human, and totally authentic—if occasionally sarcastic.
Sometimes the answers were so surprisingly honest that Eric Schmidt
would step up to the microphone and say, “Actually, I think what Sergey (or
Larry) really is trying to say is…” Sergey (or Larry) would just grin and
shrug. Then at the next TGIF, there they would be again to take tough,
awkward questions. They weren’t yet thirty at the time, but they had
instinctively grasped the power of explaining important decisions and
encouraging dissent.

EXECUTION TIME
Fight meeting proliferation
BY NOW, THE Get Stuff Done wheel may be starting to feel like the Meetings

from Hell wheel:) If you’re not careful, meeting proliferation can indeed
bring to a grinding halt your ability to execute both as an individual and as a

team. Being ruthless about making sure your team has time to execute is
one of the most important things you can do as a boss.
One approach that many have tried is to remove chairs from conference
rooms. This has the theoretical impact of shortening meetings because most
people won’t stand around a table for more than about an hour. There is
research indicating that people are more creative when standing than when
sitting. Some say sitting is the new smoking, so there may be health benefits
as well. Plus, you save money on furniture. This is all appealing, but it
never really works. I don’t know any company that has stuck to the nochairs-in-conference-rooms thing.
At Google, different teams tried declaring “No-Meeting Wednesday” or
“No-Meeting Thursday.” None was ever able to stick to it. Greg Badros, an
engineering leader at Google and Facebook, set a goal of ending 25 percent
of his meetings early. I loved that, but I don’t think he ever hit the goal.
I have found that the most effective solution is simply to fight fire with
fire. For the same reason, I blocked off think-time in calendar; I also found
it necessary to block off time in my calendar to be alone and execute. I
encouraged others to do the same. This helped them say “no” to more
unnecessary meetings.

KANBAN BOARDS
Make activity and workflows visible

industrial engineer at Toyota, developed Kanban, a
scheduling system to make supply-chain management in manufacturing
more efficient. Others have adapted the system to visualize workflows. At
its simplest, you put up a board with three columns: To Do, In Progress, and
Done. Then you buy a bunch of Post-its in different colors. The different
colors represent different people or teams. They write their tasks on their
color of Post-it and move them around from To Do, In Progress, and Done.
You can quickly see who’s the bottleneck. It’s a great way to drive personal
accountability but also for everyone on a team to see who needs help and to
give it to them. A Kanban board is different from a dashboard because it
TAIICHI OHNO, AN

focuses activities and work in progress. It gives your team time to identify
and resolve issues before they hurt the results.

Making progress visible to everyone gives more, not less, autonomy to
the team. When it’s clear to everyone where the bottlenecks are, resources
flow to the places where they are most needed, without intervention from
management. If I’m on the engineering team above and I’m ahead of where
I need to be, and I see that somebody else’s task has fallen behind, I’m
motivated to go help because I know that if that task doesn’t get done all
my work is for naught, or will be delayed.
Another reason why measuring activities and visualizing workflows is
important is that when a business is doing really well, it’s hard to tell from
the results who’s along for the ride and who’s actually making things
happen. Similarly, when the economy is tanking due to factors beyond
anyone’s control, if you just measure results it’s hard to know who’s doing a
great job bailing out your boat and who’s simply panicking or making the
situation worse. Friends of mine who worked at Yahoo! and AOL have told
me that when things were going well, whole teams would get richly
rewarded; but when they started going badly, nobody had any idea what to

do. They’d just been measuring the results, and they didn’t understand what
had been driving them or what to do when the results turned bad.
Measuring activities and visualizing workflows will push you and your
team to make sure you really understand how what you all do drives
success—or doesn’t. Early in my tenure, the AdSense Inside Sales Team
was supposed to cold-call large Web sites. But they received an
overwhelming number of inquiries from smaller Web sites every day, and of
course answering the phone was so much easier than cold-calling. In other
words, they were supposed to be out catching big fish, but since so many
small fish were just jumping into the boat, they didn’t bother going after the
big ones. When we just kept track of the huge sums of money rolling in, it
looked as though the team was doing great. It was only when we looked at
an activity metric—the number of cold calls the team was generating—that
we realized we had a problem; we didn’t need to pay an expensive sales
force just to take orders. After we started measuring activity, revenue spiked
significantly. Measuring activities also allowed us to figure out who the
good salespeople were. Taking orders is a skill very different from selling.
Measuring activities will also create more respect between teams. It’s
always surprising how quick one team is to assume that another team sits
around doing nothing, and how much resentment builds up over this. When
you can see from a Kanban board what people are doing, respect tends to
flow pretty naturally.
Measuring activities and displaying them publicly also tends to lead to
ratings and promotions that more consistently reward the top performers
and are less prone to the biases that bedevil us all. Jack Rivkin, who led
equity research at Shearson Lehman Hutton, started measuring his analysts’
activities as well as results. When he measured activities, it became clearer
to everyone what actually drove results. As a result, Rivkin’s team went
from being ranked by Institutional Investor as number fifteen in 1987 when
he took over, to number four in 1989, and number one in 1990. The
objective measurement had another impact as well: fairness. Because it was
so clear to everybody what drove success, bias was less likely to creep into

hiring, rating, and promotion decisions when activities got measured.
Rivkin’s team had more women than any other in the industry.

WALK AROUND
Learn about small problems to prevent big ones

people who report directly to you is relatively
straightforward, even if it requires time and discipline. But if you are a
manager of managers, listening “deep” in your organization is much harder.
You can’t listen to everybody. You can’t have 1:1s with hundreds or
thousands of people. If you have office hours, you’ll hear from the same
three cranks week after week. What do you do?
I never met anyone who was better at connecting with the whole
company than Dick Costolo. There were a lot of things he did to achieve
this, but one of them was quite simple. He just walked around.
Try taking a page out of Dick’s book. Schedule an hour a week of
walking-around time. Management by walking around is a tried-and-true
technique. According to historian Stephen B. Oates, Abraham Lincoln
invented it by informally inspecting his troops during the American Civil
War. It was part of Hewlett Packard’s culture in the 1970s. It’s not
complicated to do.
Notice the things you don’t notice when you’re buried in work at your
desk or racing, head down, from one meeting to the next. Ask people who
catch your attention—ideally, people you haven’t talked to in a while—
what they’re working on. Find some small problems and treat them like
“the universe through a grain of sand.” Awareness of these small problems
can be useful in several ways.
LISTENING TO THE

First they’ll help you find the devil in the details. Too often a boss is the
last to know when something is going wrong. The reason is generally not
because people are intentionally hiding problems, but because they only
want to bring the important things to your attention. But a problem may be
more important than they realize.
Second, being aware of small problems and maybe even rolling up your
sleeves and fixing them yourself is the best way to kill the “it’s not my job”
or, worse, the “that’s beneath me” mentality on your team. If nothing is
beneath your attention, then others will pay attention to details as well.
Third, when you show that you care about the small things that
contribute to customer happiness or the quality of life on your team,
suddenly everybody cares more about them, and some of the big things start
working better, too.
At one point, Dick was trying consciously to create a culture at Twitter
in which people would fix small processes and annoyances rather than just
complaining about them. One day during his walk-around, he passed two
people complaining about the dirty dishes piled up in a micro-kitchen.
Usually he would have filed that away and been annoyed by it. But this was
his walk-around time, so he just took a moment to fix the problem himself.
He stopped and looked around. “Do you think that would be a better place
for the dishes?” he asked the two complainers, pointing to an equally

convenient but less-visible spot. They nodded yes, and to their amazement,
he started moving the dirty dishes there himself. Needless to say, they
stopped complaining and started helping. This story got told and retold.

BE CONSCIOUS OF CULTURE
Everyone is watching you, but that doesn’t mean it’s all about you
“CULTURE EATS STRATEGY for lunch.”1 A team’s culture has an enormous

impact on its results, and a leader’s personality has a huge impact on a
team’s culture. Who you are as a human being impacts your team’s culture
enormously.
Ben Silbermann, founder and CEO of Pinterest, once told me that he
was worried the company’s culture reflected his own personality too much.
He was introverted; the company was introverted. He didn’t like to argue;
there wasn’t as much debate at the company as he would’ve liked. This
observation struck me, because I’d often felt the same way with my own
teams but had never had the courage to articulate it. There were days when
the teams I led were like a fun-house mirror, exaggerating my flaws. The
culture of the team often reflected me, but not always in the way I would
have chosen.
That’s a scary thing. Since it’s pretty much impossible to change who
you are as a human being, does that mean that you can’t really change your
team’s culture? You have a big impact; is there no way to control that
impact?
Fortunately, as with all things, it’s not just about you. As with your
evaluations of others, focus on behavior rather than on character, on actions
rather than “essentials.” If you are regularly and genuinely soliciting
feedback, the most egregious of these qualities will inevitably come to light.
And, as I described in earlier chapters, your ability to have Radically
Candid relationships with everyone on your team will move your culture
toward—or away from—Radical Candor. You will influence other aspects
of your culture as well, simply by moving consciously through the steps of
the GSD wheel.

People are listening. Like it or not, you’re under the microscope
When you become the boss, you are under the microscope. People do
listen to you in an intense way you never experienced before you became a
manager. They attribute meaning—sometimes accurately, sometimes not—
to what you say, to the clothes you wear, to the car you drive. In some ways,
becoming a boss is like getting arrested. Everything you say or do can and
will be used against you.
When he led Goldman Sachs, Bob Rubin once walked the trading floor
to get a feel for what was going on. He stopped and chatted with a trader
who’d just completed a transaction buying gold. “I like gold,” Bob said
offhandedly. A few weeks later, Bob was startled to see how much gold the
firm had bought recently. “Why are we so long on gold?” Bob asked.
“Because you told us to. You said you liked gold!” was the response. Bob
thought he was just making a friendly remark, not giving a “buy” order.
When I was at Apple, somebody told me that the bus program to shuttle
employees back and forth between Cupertino and San Francisco had been
delayed because Steve had to choose the leather for the interior of the
busses. I happened to have lunch with the director of the bus program and
asked him if the story were true. He laughed: “No.” But when I then asked
him how the color scheme of the busses had been chosen, he admitted that
he’d gone to the parking lot and taken a look at Steve’s car: silver exterior
with black leather seats. So the busses? Silver exterior with black leather
seats.
You don’t have to be crazy successful like Bob Rubin or Steve Jobs to
have a bigger impact than you intend to as the boss. Early in my career, I
said to a salesman who tended to wear black shiny shirts, “I sure do like a
man in a white oxford.” I was chagrined to see that the very next day he
showed up in a white oxford, and for every day for a week after that. Of
course, I had been dropping a hint. But I was new to being a boss and
totally unused to having people take my hints so seriously.

Often when you’re the boss you might say or do something you expect
to be blown off, whereas in fact you’ve moved way further out on the
“challenge directly” axis than you had intended to.
Clarify. Be vigilant about clarifying what you are communicating
Given the level of scrutiny you’re under as the boss, it’s important to
clarify what you’re saying—even when you think you’re not saying
anything.
When I was at Google, I drove an orange Honda Element, pretty
identifiable as mine since it was virtually alone among the herd of Priuses
and other fuel-efficient cars that Google subsidized. Because my office was
a couple of miles away from my boss’s, I frequently drove to meetings.
Parking was a disaster and my schedule was packed, so I tended to park
haphazardly and in places that only vaguely resembled parking spots. Since
I was pushing at work for an “ask for forgiveness not permission” culture in
which people felt free to challenge the rules, this worked. But if I had been
trying to create a “measure twice cut once” kind of culture, I would at least
have had to offer an explanation for my parking practices, and probably
would have had to reform them. I didn’t park like that when I worked at
Apple.…
Debate and decide explicitly. Don’t let things that pervert your culture
“just happen”
There are a number of debates and decisions that you are going to be
tempted to “delegate to HR.” These are often around things you’d rather not
waste your brain cells on. Are you going to call it a “holiday party” or a
“Christmas party”? Will there be a Christmas tree there, or not? A
menorah? Will you serve alcohol at the party? How will you deal with it
when you come in Monday morning to find bras and panties and a jock
strap on the conference-room table? What to do about the fact that one
person on your team just kicked another in the butt? True, it was just one of

those friendly sideways kicks that you used to give your friends in middle
school, but the recipient is outraged. Who’s going to decide how to deal
with it?
Believe me, it’s tempting to punt on these decisions. But if you do, the
decisions that do get made by HR/employment lawyers without your
humanizing influence will push your culture in a “the law is an ass”
direction. If nobody makes a decision, you wind up in Lord of the Flies
territory. Neither is the culture you want.
Persuade. Pay attention to the small things
When I first got the job at Apple, I got a thoughtfully organized tri-fold
folder with the words, “Ah, Paperwork!” written on the outside. Real
thought and care had gone into making the annoyance of new-job
paperwork as painless as possible. The folder was a thing of beauty—welldesigned but not crazy-expensive. The choice of language made me smile.
The care with which the paperwork had been assembled communicated to
me even before I started what kind of work would be expected of me.
When you pay attention to seemingly small details, it can have a big
impact on persuading people that your culture is worth understanding and
adapting to. The office environment is part of setting a tone and culture.
Silicon Valley is famous for its whimsical offices and high-end chefs. But
even if you can’t afford this kind of largesse, you can make sure the coffee
in the kitchen is what people like to drink—and offer some green tea bags,
too. One publishing company in New York responded to complaints about
the coffee by having a kind of Pepsi Challenge. Coffee consumption went
up dramatically and staff surveys noted real appreciation for the move.
The office environment affects culture. Do you want a Zen-like orderly,
well-lit environment or a stuff-everywhere frenetic environment? The small
choices you make will persuade people to act in accordance with the culture
you want to build with your team.
Execute: Action should reflect your culture

It’s surprising how a small action from you can impact your team’s
culture, even after you’re no longer around.
One day I arrived at my office at Google to find that a couch had been
moved to a place where it forced people to take several extra steps to walk
around it. I wasn’t trying to create a culture obsessed with feng shui, but
that couch bugged me, and so I decided to move it. I was trying to
encourage an obsession with efficiency, and those extra steps were anything
but efficient. I started shoving the couch back where it belonged. A man on
the team saw me and joked, “It looks like Kim’s got a new job.” I smiled
but pushed back against his attitude: “If something’s in your way, it’s
always your job to fix it!” Two years after I’d left Google, I went back to
visit an old friend and saw a slogan written on the wall. “On the AdSense
team, we move the couches!” Scott Sheffer, who took over my job when I
left Google, said repeatedly that he felt the single most important thing I’d
done to help set him up for success was to focus on the team’s culture.
Learn
Shit happens. When you’re the boss and shit happens, it’s your
responsibility to learn from it and make a change. If you don’t, you create a
culture that doesn’t learn from its mistakes.
At Google, my team and I wanted to foster an informal culture. One of
the small things we did was to turn a conference room into a “team cozy,”
with no tables or chairs in it, just a bunch of couches and beanbag chairs. I
generally had my staff meetings there. Then one Monday morning we came
in to find some men’s underwear and a bra wedged in the couch cushions.
Sex in the office was not the culture I was shooting for. Gone was the “team
cozy.” We were going to have to find another way to be informal.
Listen …
The most amazing thing about a culture is that once it’s strong, it’s selfreplicating. Even though you’ve taken a number of conscious actions to

impact it, you’ll know you’ve succeeded when it truly is no longer about
you.
When we built AdSense teams globally, I was nervous about what the
team culture would be like in each office. I wanted to encourage all the
teams to challenge authority—my authority in particular, but authority in
general. I felt like I needed to go to each office in person to drive this home.
However, I was trying to get pregnant and so was unable to travel. I was
especially worried about the team in China. Given my understanding of
Chinese culture, I thought that replicating our irreverent culture would be
especially difficult there. As described in Chapter One, I talked to the leader
of the team there, Roy Zhou, extensively about this. But would that really
translate if I couldn’t fly there myself? I was so anxious about it that if I
hadn’t been forty years old, I would have delayed starting a family and gone
on a world tour instead.
Then somebody on the team in China had the idea that all AdSense
offices around the world make a video to introduce the teams to one
another. I’ll confess that I wasn’t expecting much. But the results blew me
away; human warmth and humor were universal. The irreverence in Beijing
was just as unmistakably “AdSensy” as it was in Mountain View or Dublin.
And yet the nationalities were distinct. How had that happened? If I’d
directed each of those videos myself as AdSense culture propaganda clips, I
couldn’t have been happier about how they came out. But I’d had
absolutely nothing to do with any of them. How was this possible? It was
because the culture was self-replicating. I’d helped to create something
larger than myself. It was one of the most magical moments of my career.

NOTES

INTRODUCTION
1. AdSense is the ad product you use if you want Google to pay you.
AdSense puts ads on your Web site or blog. If you have a Web site
about, say, camping, you can put an “Ads by Google” box on your site,
and Google will fill it with ads about, say, REI tents or North Face
sleeping bags. When a user sees or clicks on them, you get paid. The
way you put that “Ads by Google” box on your site is by inserting a
snippet of code that Google gives you.
2. Webspam: Sites that game Google’s Page Rank system. It’s sort of like
junk mail or calls from telemarketers that interrupt dinner.
3. http://www.magpictures.com/stevejobsthelostinterview/.

CHAPTER ONE
1. Harari, Oren. The Powell Principles: 24 Lessons from Colin Powell, a
Legendary Leader. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002, p.4.

CHAPTER TWO
1. You can see the outtakes of the interview for the PBS documentary
Triumph of the Nerds, in The Lost Interview.

CHAPTER THREE
1. http://tomtunguz.com/nine-box-matrix-hr/.
2. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0ccb0658-596a-11e6-9f70badea1b336d4.html?siteedition=intl#axzz4GxOrK1Bg.

CHAPTER FOUR
1. The term venture capitalist Aileen Lee coined to describe a start-up that
quickly achieves a $1 billion valuation.
2. AdWords is Google’s ad product. If you want to advertise your tents,
you bid on keywords like “tent” and if you win the auction, your ads will
run on Google’s search pages when people type in the word “tent.” Your
ads might also run on other people’s Web sites if they are about tents.
When users click on your ad, you pay Google.
3. https://hbr.org/2008/02/getting-the-best-employee-idea
4. http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB115015518018078348
5. from The Lost Interview.
6. At first I wrote “the truth” instead of “the best answer.” “The truth”
implies permanence, a notion that can be dangerous to “learning” and, as
described in the previous section, can promote arrogance, which is
disastrous for Radical Candor.
7. I feel sheepish covering such well-trodden territory in such a few pages.
But, despite two fancy degrees from two fancy schools, I’d never learned
about this model until I spent time at Apple University, and I found it
really helpful, so I share it, briefly, with you. Many tens of thousands of
books have been written on Aristotle’s Rhetoric. For another quick but
more academic reference, see The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-rhetoric/). Probably the mostcited twenty-first-century look at persuasion is Robert Cialdini’s book
Influence. A quick search will reveal many other great sources.
8. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jj6q_z2Ni9M

CHAPTER SIX
1. Martell, R.F., D.M. Lane, C. Emrich. “Male-female differences: A
computer simulation.” American Psychologist 51, 2 (Feb. 1996).

CHAPTER EIGHT
1. Variously attributed to Peter Drucker, Jack Welch, and others.

GETTING STARTED

CONGRATULATIONS! YOU’VE TAKEN AN IMPORTANT step to becoming the kind

of boss you want to be just by reading this book. Not that I have all the
answers, but taking time out to think about how to be a better boss is a huge
step.
Now it’s time to start putting the suggestions in this book into practice.
What should you do first? What’s the “order of operations”? Explaining
ideas and techniques is a very different business from operationalizing
them, and I want to make sure you get started on the right foot. Below is a
plan to build a culture of Radical Candor on your team.

SHARE YOUR STORIES
EXPLAIN RADICAL CANDOR to your team so they understand what you’re up

to. You can also ask them to read the book, or show them videos that are on
the Radical Candor website. But it’s best if you explain it in your own
words. What is your version of the “um” story or the “Bob” story? Tell your
stories to your team. Show some vulnerability. Your personal stories will
explain, better than any management theory, what you really mean and
show why you really mean it. That’s why I told all those personal stories in
this book. Your stories will mean a lot more to your team than mine do,
because they mean something to you.

PROVE YOU CAN TAKE IT BEFORE YOU START DISHING
IT OUT
START ASKING YOUR team to criticize you. Review “Soliciting Impromptu

Guidance” in chapter six. And remember, don’t let people off the hook
when they don’t say much—because they won’t, at first. Embrace the
discomfort to move past it. Pay close attention if you aren’t getting any
criticism. If you want, you can copy the Radical Candor framework in
Chapter Two and track who’s saying what to you there, or you can use the
Candor Gauge at radicalcandor.com. Just because people aren’t criticizing
you doesn’t mean they think you’re perfect. If you realize that you’re not
getting any criticism, try Michael Dearing’s “orange box” technique (see
chapter six).
Soliciting guidance, especially criticism, is not something you do once
and check off your list—this will now be something you do daily. But it’ll
happen in little one- to two-minute conversations, not in meetings you have
to add to your calendar. It’s something to be conscious of, not something to
schedule. It will feel strange at first, but once you get in the habit, it’ll feel
weird not to do it. You won’t ever move on from getting guidance any more
than you’ll ever move on from having to drink water or brush your teeth.
Begin “career
conversations” with your team. Start with people whom you’ve been
working with for the longest. (Review “Career Conversations” in Chapter
Seven; and for more details on these conversations, see radicalcandor.com)
Like getting criticism from your team, “career conversations” are not
something you do once and check off the list. Remember, people change,
and you need to change with them! That’s why it’s a good idea to do one
round of “career conversations” a year with each of your direct reports
during your 1:1 time.
Now

you’re

ready

to

start

having

career

conversations.

In parallel: perfect your 1:1 conversations. In parallel (because it will take you at

least three to six weeks to get through these three conversations with

everyone on your team since you want to leave a week or two between each
of the three conversations), make sure you are having meaningful 1:1
conversations with your direct reports. (Review “1:1 Conversations” in
chapter eight.)
Next. After you have explained Radical Candor, asked for guidance, had

career conversations, and improved your 1:1 conversations, you’ll notice
that you are earning your team’s trust and building a better culture. Now
you’re ready to start improving the way you give impromptu praise and
criticism. Remember, impromptu guidance happens best in one- to twominute conversations. (Review “Giving Impromptu Guidance” in chapter
six.) Make sure you gauge your guidance. (Review “Gauge Your
Impromptu Guidance. Get a Baseline, Track Your Improvements” in
chapter six.) Remember, you may think you’re being Radically Candid, but
one person may not have heard any criticism at all, another may have heard
it as ruinously empathetic, and yet another as Obnoxious Aggression. You
have to adjust for each individual. You have to be not just self-aware but
relationally and culturally aware.
Take a deep breath. Assess. How’s it going? What’s working? What’s not

working? Who can you talk to? Can your boss help? Your team? A mentor
outside of work? A coach? Others from the Radical Candor community?
Don’t try to do more new things until you feel 1) you’ve made good
progress on the fundamental building block of management: getting and
giving guidance, 2) you’ve gotten to know your direct reports better, and 3)
you’re happy with your 1:1s.
If the answer to these three questions is “yes,” you’re ready to perfect staff meetings,
decisions, and debates for your team. You’ve built the foundations of trust that are

central to your ability to get stuff done. Next step is to make sure your staff
meetings are maximally productive. During the meeting, you are reviewing
key metrics, sharing updates, and identifying your big decisions and

debates. Don’t let them drag on too long. Don’t blow them off. (See “Staff
Meetings” in chapter eight.) Now’s a good time to roll out the “big
decision” and “big debate” meetings. (See “‘Big Decision’ Meetings” and
“‘Big Debate’ Meetings” in chapter eight.)
Return to guidance. Make sure you are encouraging guidance between

people on your team. Establish a “no backstabbing” or require a “clean
escalation” norm on your team. Explain that you’re not going to allow one
person to come and talk to you about another; you can give your team
“Prevent Backstabbing” in chapter six to read, but the important thing is not
their reading but your enforcement. You’ll have to follow up. While this
will sometimes result in extra meetings to resolve disputes getting thrown
on your calendar, it will save more time than it costs because there will be
fewer political situations exploding in your face.
Fight meeting proliferation. Make sure you’re not getting overscheduled.

Think very consciously about what you are doing that you can stop doing.
Put some think time in your calendar. (See “Think Time” in Chapter Eight.)
Calendar clutter is a permanent struggle for most organizations. Fight the
good fight, not just for yourself but on behalf of your team!
Plan for the future of your team. Start doing a growth-management plan for

each person on your team. (See “Growth Management Plans” in chapter
seven.) Make sure that you are not creating a promotion-obsessed culture,
and give some extra thought to how you’re rewarding your rock stars (see
chapter seven).
Return to guidance. Ask your team to start gauging each other’s guidance.

There are more of them than there are of you, so anything you can do to get
them to give one another more Radically Candid praise and criticism will
reinforce a Radically Candid culture and provide you with more leverage
than any amount of guidance you can give or get personally. If they resist,
try starting with Dan Woods’s “Whoops the Monkey” technique at your

next staff meeting. (See “Peer Guidance,” chapter six.) This is also a good
time to assess whether or not you are still doing a good job getting and
giving guidance. Remember, it’s hard, it’s unnatural, and it’s the atomic
building block of management.
Walk around. You’ve been at this for awhile now. Do things feel different

on the team? What sorts of things do you want to know but are not hearing?
Put aside some time each week to walk around and have informal
spontaneous chats with people. (See “Walk Around,” chapter eight.) If you
have a feeling that things are still not going well, and that there’s a lot of
skepticism on the team, go back to step one. Also, consider rolling out a
“manager fix-it week.” (See chapter six.) How does your culture feel? What
can you do to improve it? (See “Culture,” chapter eight.)
Are you a manager of managers? If so, try “skip level meetings” for
everyone on your team. You’ll need to do these only once a year, but it’s a
good idea to cluster them in a two-week period so that nobody feels singled
out. (See “Speak Truth to Power,” chapter eight.)
Begin to take a more Radically Candid approach to the processes that your company may
have in place. Be Radically Candid when hiring, firing, promoting (see chapter

seven), as well as giving formal performance reviews (see chapter six).
That’s a lot of things to do, but it’s not as bad as it sounds. If you take
every suggestion recommended in this book, the total time required is about
ten hours a week, five of which are 1:1 meetings that you’re probably
already holding anyway. Of course, some processes like growthmanagement conversations, skip-level meetings, and calibrations don’t get
spread out each week but will come in bursts, so some weeks you may have
eight hours of work associated with your core responsibilities as a boss,
others twelve others five. But that still leaves fifteen hours a week to think
and execute, and another fifteen hours to deal with the various
unpredictable things that you’ll be asked to do.

In other words, Radically Candid management does take serious time,
but it also leaves you time to pursue your own area of expertise and to deal
with the unpredictable. Mostly, it requires you to be conscious, and to bring
your full humanity to work with you.
This “order of operations” will help you prioritize what to do when and
with whom, but I bet you still have some questions. Russ and I started
Candor, Inc. to help you get answers. If at any time you would like to talk
to other people who are rolling out Radical Candor, or if you have followup questions or management dilemmas for us, or if you want to try the apps
that we’ve built to help you put these ideas into practice, go to
radicalcandor.com. We’re eager to continue the conversation with you, to
answer your questions, and to help you make Radical Candor a reality in
your organization.
* * *
SIMPLY MAKING RESOLUTIONS or thinking that something is a good idea

rarely results in real change. That is why the second half of this book is so
focused on helping you implement the suggestions described here.
Changing behavior is hard, but it is possible. In fact, you’ve already started:
by reading this book. The best way to begin transforming your workplace is
to think hard about why you want to make the change, and then to hold on
to those ideals as you identify the specific things you can begin to do
differently.
Don’t get too bogged down in the details before plunging in, though,
because it is the rewards of the process that will keep you energized and
moving forward. Remember: once you build Radically Candid relationships
with the people who report to you, you will eliminate a terrible source of
misery in the world: the bad boss. You will achieve results you never
imagined possible. You will create an environment where you and the
people who report to you can love their work and working together. Perhaps

most surprising, you’ll find that the way you work ripples out into the rest
of your life and enriches all your relationships.
Although I have focused primarily on the positive experiences I’ve had
at work, I certainly know what it feels like to slog away in a job that is
crushingly boring under a boss who sucks the joy out of everything. And
the most damaging aspect of those experiences was what they did to my
personal life. It was simply not possible to be a scintillating bundle of joy
on the weekend when I’d spent the five previous days doing mind-numbing
work that was being overseen by a Dementor.
It doesn’t have to be that bad. You can take a moment to show the
people you work with that you care about what they care about at a basic
human level. You can warn them if they are making a mistake—not because
you hold yourself superior to them, but because you care. You can help
others on your team take a step in the direction of their dreams, and even
teach them how to help you do the same. You can work together to achieve
results that you’re all proud of. And when you do these things, which are
absolutely in your power to do, your Radical Candor will transform your
work and your life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

WRITING THIS BOOK IS THE hardest thing I’ve ever done, and I could never

have finished if it weren’t for the generosity and help of many people. No
book is the work of just one person, and I’m honestly not sure why we’ve
come to insist on the myth of “the author.”
The first difficulty was getting inside my own head. That required long
stretches of free time, time not only to sit at my computer and write, but
also to take long rambling walks to think, and to have long conversations to
debate ideas. That didn’t leave time for a regular job. Many thanks to my
team at Dropbox, in particular Olga Navarskaya, Oliver Jay, and Johann
Butting, for being so incredibly gracious about my abrupt decision to leave
so that I could write this book. Thanks to Dick Costolo, Drew Houston,
Adam Bain, Joanna Strober, Ryan Smith, Shannon Miller, Jack Dorsey, and
Kevin Gibbon, all of whom offering me advisory roles that gave me
flexibility and time to write and also kept body and soul together.
Next came the even harder part: getting back out of my own head, once
I’d gotten in. For that I depended on my editor, the kindness of friends, and
the generosity of strangers.
Writing a book can feel a lot like being lost at sea. Tim Bartlett, my
editor, and the boss of this book, was the life raft who rescued me from that
writer’s insanity. He not only saw through the madness to the good parts of
the book clearly enough to buy it, he cleaned it up admirably. Writing is
truly a collaboration between author and editor, and to work with Tim was

to feel myself in the care of a master. He knew what to cut, what to expand,
when to say, “Hello! What happened to care personally??”and when to
wrest the manuscript out of my hands. Tim’s clarity of thought illuminates
literally every page of this book. Tim is the best of editors, and his name
should certainly be on the cover along with mine.
I also want to thank Tim’s wife and children, as working on this book
took him away from family time and vacation time. And, as long as we are
talking about interrupted vacation time, I want to thank my husband, my
children my parents, my siblings, my husband’s parents, my husband’s
siblings, and my children for your understanding and support during those
times when I abandoned you to write and then edit this book.
There is a whole team of great people at St Martin’s Press who helped
bring this book to life to whom I’m enormously grateful. Laura Clark’s
enthusiasm for the book from the moment I stepped into St. Martin’s office
was an enormous boost not just for the book but for me personally. I’ve
learned a lot from her about how to market ideas. Gabi Gantz, Annabella
Hochschild, Karlyn Hixson, Eric C. Meyer, Kathy Parise, and James
Iacobelli were all enormously helpful, and patient with me every step of the
way. There were also dozens of others whom I didn’t get a chance to meet,
but all of whom worked hard to get this book out and sold. Most especially
Jeremy Pink, whom I’ve never seen, but I feel a certain intimacy with him
as he improved literally every sentence in this book. The work that people
in publishing do to make sure ideas see the light of day is so important to
our world, and, I’m afraid, not made easier by the industry in which I’ve
made my career. I look forward to many years of collaboration to finding
out a better way forward, a better collaboration between tech and
publishing.
This book would never have gotten to Tim or the team at St Martin’s
Press if it hadn’t been for the help of many people who helped throughout
the process. My friends Adam Richman and Kim Keating were generous in
their advice on how to get published. My agent Howard Yoon read a draft
of this book the same day I sent it to him, and called me with an enthusiasm

that reassured me I hadn’t just wasted the previous three years, just when I
needed to hear that most. He actually wrote the proposal for me when I was
struggling with it. He also spent months helping me with a rewrite that was
a much-needed CPR for a book that was getting crushed under its own
weight. Howard is the rarest of agents, one who’s as gifted with words as he
is at crafting a thoughtful sales process.
And before either Howard or Tim saw the book, family and friends read
draft after draft, and pounded on word after word, or dragged me away from
the book on long walks, where I could regain a little perspective.
My parents, Allen and Mary Malone, probably read fifteen different
drafts of the book and never seemed bored. If that is not a labor of love, I
don’t know what is.
My husband Andy stubbornly argued against my logic for calling this
book Cruel Empathy, which I was determined to do for almost two years. I
don’t know why I argued. Andy is the soul of understanding, and when he
digs his heels in, he is always right.
Several people spent enormous time editing various drafts of this book,
and I am deeply indebted to each of them. Denni Cawley edited the most
painful early versions of this book and helped me with research. Sierra
Kephart-Clary created order out of later madness. James Buckhouse
restored a sense of beauty and fun to the editing process just when I needed
it most. Katya Rice saved me from getting too abstract or too specific, and
was able to make a thousand small changes at the same time she was
helping me focus neither too blurrily on the the forest or too minutely on
any particular leaf.
Alice Traux was, during two intense round of edits, a touchstone of
sanity. She is relentless in her unwillingness to accept even a hint of cliché,
and always willing to hold up a mirror when what I was writing made no
sense. At the same time, her concern for my morale throughout the process
was a constant source of comfort. I’m deeply indebted.
Jim and Mary Ottaway edited an early version of this book, encouraged
me to keep writing, and then Jim heroically did another incredibly fast and

thorough edit in the final hour.
Many thanks to Catharine Burhenne-Sanderson, Steve Diamond, Maria
Gotsch, Ellen Konar, and Albert Ni, Jane Penner, and Gretchen Ruben all of
whom not only read the book but also shared numerous long walks/ meals /
wine, pushing me to re-think whole sections of this book, and to feel a little
less lonely as I wrote it. They all helped me think more clearly as I
struggled to make one idea or another clear, and their compassion for me
reminded me to have empathy for the reader.
Olga Navarskaya persuaded me that the Radical Candor framework I
initially came up with was logically inconsistent and needed to be improved
upon. It took three months of thinking to fix it and I never would have
persevered if I hadn’t been able to imagine her skeptical face before me.
I owe the whole second half of this book, Things You Can Do, to Daniel
Rubin, who pounded it into my reluctant head over the course of several
months that a management philosophy by itself wasn’t going to change a
damn thing or be all that helpful to anyone.
I am enormously grateful to Josh Cohen, Michael Chu, Michael
Dearing, Drew Houston, Jared Smith, Russ Laraway, Elisse Lockhart,
Charles Morris, Venkat Rao, Caroline Reitz, Sheryl Sandberg, Michael
Schrage, Myra Strober, Richard Tedlow, Valerie Yakich, Chris Yeh, all of
whom read and edited this book in great detail, each of them making
numerous suggestions and comments that were essential.
Many people asked to read this book as I wrote it, and all of them
helped, some of them by offering some “radical candor” that helped me see
flaws in the book, others by just expressing interest and encouraging me to
keep going: Dinara Abilova, Alina Adams, Matt Adams, Richard Alfonsi,
Brett Berson, Gina Bianchini, Jeff Bidzos, Nick Bloom, Simon Bolger,
Adam Brandenburger, Jenna Buffaloe, Matthew Carpenter, Andrew Catton,
Denni Cawley, Lawrence Coburn, Betsy Cohen, Kate Connally, Jack
Dorsey, Sarah Friar, Maria Giacona, Kevin Gibbon, Adam Grant, Josh
Grau, Karen Grove, James Groves, Matt Hogan, Adam Hundt, Kate
Jhaveri, Neeru Khosla, Elizabeth Kim, Janet Kim, Aliza Knox, Brett Kopf,

Jayant Kulkarni, Christine Lee, Battle Malone, Tim Martin, Ben Matasar,
Blaire Mattson, Michael Maughan, Jamie McCollough, Shannon Miller,
Dobromir Montauk, Maran Nelson, Yu-Shen Ng, Andrew Peterson, Ann
Poletti, Kanjun Qiu, Adam Regelmann, Robyn Reiss, Katya Rice, Louisa
Ritter, Margaret Rosser, Matt Rosser, Dan Rummel, Johnny Russ, Scott
Sheffer, Lindsey Semple, Lauren Sherman, Dimitar Simeonov, Mason
Simon, Ryan Smith, Mollie Solon, Donna Staton, Michael Stoppelman,
Jason Strober, Joanna Strober, Shea Tate-Di, Jason Tan, Joseph Ternasky,
Sophia Tsai, Casey Tunguz, Tomasz Tunguz, Dash Victor, Jackie Xu, I’m
deeply grateful to each and every one of these people.
It has often been said that great artists steal. I’m not sure I’m a great
artist, but I definitely stole many of the ideas in this book, many of which
are simply things I’ve seen the people I work with do.
Three people in particular influenced this book: Shona Brown, Russ
Laraway, and Sheryl Sandberg.
Shona Brown, SVP of Business Operations at Google, always prefers to
remain the unsung hero, so you read fewer stories about her in this book. It
was a dose of especially generous Radical Candor from Shona that
launched me on my current career. Much of Google’s approach to
management was conceived, architected, and operationalized by Shona. She
described her approach to leadership powerfully in her book, The Edge of
Chaos, and then she proved it worked when she rolled her ideas out at
Google. She was instrumental in designing the way that Google hired,
reviewed, compensated, developed, and promoted people; the way that
Google set and achieved goals; the way that Google made decisions; and
the ongoing redesign of Google’s organization to stay nimble as it grew.
Her design decisions had an enormous impact on Google’s trajectory.
Watching how Russ Laraway leads his teams taught and teaches me
daily new lessons about what it means to be a kickass boss. Not only did he
teach me much of what I know about management, he reminds me daily
what it means to be a good human being.

Sheryl Sandberg is the best boss I ever had, and a person who totally
changed the trajectory of my life. Time and again, she has pushed me to do
things I never imagined I could do, and helped me take a step in the
direction of my dreams.
You’ll read dozens of stories about things I learned from the people
whom I’ve worked with throughout this book. I want to thank all of them
for their commitment to being great bosses, for the example they set for me
in my career. I hope I did justice to their ideas as I’ve described them in the
course of this book. There are also a number of people from whom I learned
a lot about what it means to be a great boss, but who preferred to stay in the
background. Much of what I’ve written about I learned implicitly from Tom
Pickett and Scott Sheffer, who were on my team at Google, and Alan
Warren, my co-founder at Juice.
Last but certainly not least, I am eternally grateful to Dan Pink for
helping me see I was onto something meaningful and then giving this book
its title in the space of a short elevator ride.
Everyone who helped me write this book taught me that if you’re open
to Radical Candor, you can find a shared humanity and sense of purpose in
those moments that would otherwise be unremarkable—in that elevator ride
you had to take to retrieve your bag, while walking your dog, responding in
140 characters to a remarkable Tweet from a stranger, reconnecting over a
new idea with an old friend.

INDEX

The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the
pages in your e-book. Please use the search function on your e-reading
device to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that
appear in the print index are listed below.
“Abrasive Trap” (bias)
AdSense
AdWords
alcohol use
all-hands meetings
American Civil War
AOL
Apple
iPads by
iTunes by
job trajectories at
leadership/collaborative culture at
Managing at Apple class at
relationships as focus of
University
Argyris, Chris
Aristotle
Atlantic
Aviation Safety Reporting System
backstabbing
Badros, Greg
Bardin, Noam
Barksdale, Jim
Belson, Gavin (fictional character)
Belvedere (pet)

bias
in character perceptions
in performance ratings
in promotions
in skill assessments
“Big Debate” meetings
logistics of
purpose of
“Big Decision” meetings
Blue Sky projects
body language
bosses. See also guidance; Radical Candor; results; team-building/management
arrogance by
career growth management by
“Care Personally” precept for
“Challenge Directly” precept for
collaborative decision making by
criticism by
criticism of
culture of company/team influenced by
firing by
“fix-it weeks” for
gender bias considerations for
guidance as function of
hiring by
“Manipulative Insincerity” by
motivation of team by
“Obnoxious Aggression” by
professional distance and
promotion to
results as responsibility of
“Ruinous Empathy” by
skip-level meetings on
team management as responsibility of
boundaries, workplace
emotional awareness supporting
openness demonstrations and
physical contact and
trust building and
value sharing and
“bring your whole self to work” concept
Brin, Sergey
Brooks, Herb
Brown-Philpot, Stacy
Brown, Shona
Burhenne, Catharine
burnout
learning’s prevention due to

Bush, George W.
Butterfield, Stewart
Campbell, Bill
Candor Gauge tool
Candor, Inc.
online resources at
career conversations. See also growth management, career; team-building/management
“dreams” element of
“eighteen-month plan” element of
“life story” element of
in 1:1 meetings
team growth/management via
“Care Personally” precept
autonomy of team and
boundary observation and
career growth management using
centering as support to
collaborative results using
criticism using
gender and
“Manipulative Insincerity” v.
motivation and
in praise
professional distance v.
scenario demonstrating
termination of employees using
Catherine the Great
Center for Creative Leadership
centering
as priority
work-life integration for
“Challenge Directly” precept
in criticism
gender considerations for
growth management’s tie to
scenario demonstrating
clarification stage, achieving results
1:1 meetings for
self-clarification’s importance in
staff meetings for
team clarification’s importance in
team culture’s tie to
think time allotted for
“The Coddling of the American Mind” (Atlantic)
Cohen, Joshua
collaboration. See also results
analysis stage of

Apple’s culture of
clarification of ideas in
debate stage of
decision stage of
execution stage of
Google’s culture of
GSD wheel as tool for
learning stage of
listening stage of
persuasion stage of
results driven by
Competing on the Edge (Brown)
Conscious Business (Kofman)
consistency
in promotions
Cook, Tim
Costolo, Dick
credibility, debate
Cringely, Bob
criticism. See also guidance; praise
of bosses
“Care Personally” precept applied to
“Challenge Directly” precept applied to
disagreement with
“Manipulative Insincerity” in
“Obnoxious Aggression” in
praise balanced with
public v. private
relationships’ impact on
rewarding of
“Ruinous Empathy” in
skip level approach to
of team
culture of company/team
actions as reflections of
bosses’ influence on
clarification’s importance for
details’ impact on
learning from mistakes and
poor performance connected to
results’ impact on
self-replication of
Cutts, Matt
Dearing, Michael
debate stage, achieving results
“Big Debate” meetings for
dissent mandated in

ego avoidance in
endpoint establishment for
humor/fun’s role in
pauses in
settling too early in
team culture’s tie to
decision stage, achieving results
“Big Decision” meetings for
“spelunking” prior to
Deltathree
Denial (Tedlow)
The Devil Wears Prada (movie)
Dorsey, Jack
DoubleClick
dreams, conversations about
Dropbox
Ecclesiastes
ego
criticism and
debates and
decisions and
eighteen-month plans
Einstein, Albert
Eliot, T. S.
Ellison, Ralph
email, criticism via
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
emotions
others’
persuasion’s tie to
reactions to
your own
Eustace, Alan
Evernote
“Excellent Performance/Gradual Growth” career trajectory
growth plans for
performance rating equity and
promotions/rewards for
recognition’s importance in
respect’s importance in
“Excellent Performance/Steep Growth” career trajectory
blocks to
challenge as key to
growth plans for
management resistance in
promotion/rewards for
execution stage, achieving results

team culture reflected in
time-blocking for
wasted time in
work participation in
Facebook
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
feedback boxes. See also guidance
“Feedback Gauge” app
Financial Times
firing employees. See termination of employees
“fix-it weeks”
Forstall, Scott
Fortune
“fundamental attribution errors”
gauging of guidance
gender
guidance bias attributed to
perceptual bias attributed to
skill assessment bias attributed to
General Electric (GE)
“Get Stuff Done” (GSD) wheel
Gilt Groupe
Gladwell, Malcolm
Gmail
Golden State Warriors
Goldman Sachs
Google
AdSense
AdWords
Docs
DoubleClick
Earth
Executive Management Group
Gmail
job growth trajectories at
leadership/collaborative culture of
YouTube team at
Great Depression
Great Fire of London
Gross, Terry
Grove, Andy
growth management, career
absentee approach to
ambition’s examination as tool for
career conversations for
career trajectory identification for

“Care Personally” precept applied to
“Challenge Directly” precept applied to
“Excellent Performance/Gradual Growth” trajectory and
“Excellent Performance/Steep Growth” trajectory and
firing of talent as
growth plan as tool for
hiring of talent as
impermanence of markers for
micromanagement approach to
“Middle” job trajectory and
motivation’s role in
passion’s role in
“Poor Performance/Negative Growth” trajectory and
“Poor Performance/Steep Growth” trajectory and
promotions/rewards for
rock star
superstar
talent management v.
GSD. See “Get Stuff Done” wheel
guidance. See also criticism; praise; specific precepts
backstabbing and
“Care Personally” precept impacting
“Challenge Directly” precept impacting
via criticism
feedback boxes for
“fix-it weeks” supporting
gauging success of
gender considerations in
helpfulness as key to
humility’s place in
immediacy’s importance in
in-person
“Manipulative Insincerity” in
“Obnoxious Aggression” in
peer-to-peer
via performance reviews
personalizing of
via praise
public v. private
“Ruinous Empathy” in
skip level approach to
Hack Week
The Happiness Project (Rubin)
Harrison Metal
Harvard Business Review (HBR)
helpfulness
Hewlett Packard

hired.com
hiring talent
bias in
debriefing period before
interview techniques for
job description’s importance in
process of
Hobbes
Horowitz, Ben
Houston, Drew
humility
in guidance
ontological
in terminations
Iguodala, Andre
Implicit Association Test (IAT)
Instagram
Institutional Investor
Intel
Invisible Man (Ellison)
iPads
iTunes
Ive, Jony
Jerry Maguire (movie)
Jobs, Steve
leadership style of
Johnson, David
Johnson & Johnson’s
Juice Software
Kanban boards
Kellaway, Lucy
Keyhole
Keynes, John Maynard
Knight, Bobby
Koch, Leslie
Kofman, Fred
Kosslyn, Stephen
Laraway, Russ
career conversations approach by
learning stage, achieving results
burnout as threat to
consistency as threat to
Kanban board use in
mistake examinations in

staff meetings for
walking the floor supporting
“left-hand column” exercise
Leviathan (Hobbes)
life story, conversations about
Lincoln, Abraham
listening
in 1:1 conversations
to criticism
loud
quiet
in staff meetings
team culture’s influence on
walking as tool for
Lloyd’s Bank
Lockhart, Elisse
logic, debate
The Lorax (movie)
loud listening
Managing at Apple class
Managing at Twitter class
“Manipulative Insincerity”
in criticism
in praise
scenario demonstrating
March, James
Mars Exploration Rover Mission
Mayer, Marissa
McKinsey & Company
meeting-free zones
men. See gender
Microsoft
Mill, John Stuart
Miracle (movie)
Moro Islamic Liberation Front
motivation
“Care Personally” precept applied to
changing nature of
determination of
for “Excellent Performance/Gradual Growth” job trajectories
for “Excellent Performance/Steep Growth” job trajectories
for “Middle” job trajectories
for “Poor Performance/Negative Growth” job trajectories
for “Poor Performance/Steep Growth” job trajectories
NASA
Nelson, Randy

Ner-David, Haviva
Ner-David, Jacob
Netscape
New Jersey Transit
The New Yorker
The New York Times
Oates, Stephen B.
obligation to dissent
“Obnoxious Aggression”
in criticism
in praise
scenarios demonstrating
Office
Ohno, Taiichi
O’Keeffe, Georgia
1:1 meetings
agendas for
career conversations in
follow-up questions for
frequency of
mindsets for
new ideas as goal of
performance reviews in
purpose of
results driven by
openness
in career conversations
in guidance
in relationship-building
Page, Larry
peer-to-peer
gauging
guidance
Peluso, Michelle
performance reviews, formal
fairness in
guidance during
in 1:1 meetings
promotions/rewards tied to
scheduling
two-way
written
person-to-person exchanges
persuasion stage, achieving results
all-hands meetings for
credibility establishment in

emotions’ address in
logic demonstration in
team culture’s tie to
Peter, Laurence J.
The Peter Principle (Peter)
physical contact, workplace
Pinterest
Pixar
University
“plussing” feedback technique
Poletti, Ann
“Poor Performance/Negative Growth” career trajectory
Radical Candor tips for
“Poor Performance/Steep Growth” career trajectory
expectations as factor in
growth plans for
personality/cultural disconnect tied to
personal problems tied to
skill set as factor in
Powell, Colin
praise. See also criticism; guidance
criticism balanced with
humility in
“Manipulative Insincerity” form of
“Obnoxious Aggression” form of
public v. private
of rock stars
“Ruinous Empathy” form of
visual tools for
A Primer on Decision Making (March)
promotions. See also reward(s), non-promotion
career conversations and
fairness/consistency in
over-focus on
peer reviews for
performance reviews tied to
resistance, by employee, to
superstar employees rewards and
Qualtrics
quiet listening
race, bias by
Radical Candor. See also bosses; guidance; results; team-building/management
adaptations, cultural, to
backstabbing and
“Care Personally” precept of
“Challenge Directly” precept of

gender considerations for
guidance using
limits to
v. “Manipulative Insincerity”
v. “Obnoxious Aggression”
praise-criticism balance in
relationships as factor in
results driven by
v. “Ruinous Empathy”
scenario demonstrating
team management using
terminations using
recognition. See also promotions; reward(s), non-promotion
ReelGood
relationships
boundary observations in
career conversations building
“Care Personally” dimension of
centering as aid to
criticism impacted by
openness demonstrations in
professional distance in
socializing’s tie to
superiority/arrogance’s impact on
remote offices
respect
career trajectories and
of values
results. See also collaboration
1:1 conversations driving
all-hands meetings driving
“Big Debate” meetings driving
“Big Decision” meetings driving
collaborative system driving
culture of company impacting
Kanban boards driving
meeting-free zones driving
staff meetings driving
think time driving
walking around supporting
reward(s), non-promotion. See also promotions
giving thanks as
promotions v.
recognition as
for rock star employees
Rhetoric (Aristotle)
Rivkin, Jack
Robbins, Mike

rock star employees
balance of superstars to
growth plans for
identification of
motivation/ambition of
rewarding of
Roizen, Heidi
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano
Ross, Lee
Roux, Dave
Rubin, Bob
Rubin, Gretchen
“Ruinous Empathy”
career management using
in criticism
in praise
scenario demonstrating
Saffo, Paul
St. Paul’s Cathedral, London
Sandberg, Sheryl
Sanderson, David
Schmidt, Eric
Schön, Donald
Self-Reliance (Emerson)
Seuss, Dr.
sexual harassment
Shearson Lehman Hutton
Sheffer, Scott
Silbermann, Ben
Silicon Valley (television show)
Sipprell, Karen
“situation behavior impact”
skip-level meetings
FAQs for
Slack Inc.
Smith, Jared
Smith, Ryan
snippets system (updates)
Snyder, Kieran
socializing
using alcohol
in-office v. outside-office
mandatory
“spelunking” (research)
Square
Squyres, Steve
staff meetings

clarifying as objective of
learning as objective of
listening as objective of
purpose of
Steep, Meryl
Stone, Biz
superstar employees
balance of rock stars to
growth plans for
identification of
motivation/ambition of
rewarding of
Sutton, Bob
Systrom, Kevin
TaskRabbit
teaching
as recognition tool
superstar replacements and
team-building/management. See also growth management, career
absentee approach to
growth management as part of
micromanagement approach to
motivation’s importance in
Tedlow, Richard
TEDx
Tempelsman, Maurice
Teng, Sarah
termination of employees
“Care Personally” precept used in
determination process for
follow-up posthumility’s role in
using Radical Candor
Textio
texts, criticism via
think time
Thoreau, Henry David
360 process
Toyota
trust
autonomy of team and
boundaries as support to
career conversations and
criticism and
Tuminez, Astrid
Twitter
Managing at Twitter class at

“unicorns” (successful start ups)
U.S. Institute of Peace
values, sharing of
video calls
Vorrath, Kim
Walden (Thoreau)
Wales, Roxane
walking
as listening/learning tool
meetings while
Webspam
Welch, Jack
“Whoops the Monkey” guidance system
Wintour, Anna
Wojcicki, Susan
women. See gender
Woods, Dan
Woolf, Virginia
work-life integration
World War II
Wren, Christopher
writing
of interview feedback
of performance reviews
Yahoo!
YouTube
Yoyi Digital
Zhou, Roy

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Kim Scott is the cofounder and CEO of Candor, Inc. Kim has been an
adviser at Dropbox, Kurbo, Qualtrics, Shyp, Twitter, and several other tech
companies. She was a member of the faculty at Apple University and before
that led AdSense, YouTube, and Doubleclick Online Sales and Operations
at Google. Previously, Kim was the cofounder and CEO of Juice Software,
a collaboration start-up, and led business development at Delta Three and
Capital Thinking. Earlier in her career, Kim worked as a senior policy
adviser at the FCC, managed a pediatric clinic in Kosovo, started a
diamond-cutting factory in Moscow, and was an analyst on the Soviet
Companies Fund. She is the author of three novels, Virtual Love, The
Househusband, and The Measurement Problem. She and her husband Andy
Scott are parents of twins and live in the San Francisco Bay Area. You can
sign up for email updates here.

Thank you for buying this
St. Martin’s Press ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

RADICAL CANDOR. Copyright © 2017 by Kim Scott. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America. For information, address Picador,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010.
www.stmartins.com
Cover by James Iacobelli
Diagrams by Richard Oriolo
The Library of Congress has catalogued the print edition as follows:
Names: Scott, Kim Malone, author.
Title: Radical candor: how to be a kick-ass boss without losing your
humanity / Kim Scott.
Description: First edition.|New York: St. Martin’s Press, [2017]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016044291|ISBN 9781250103505 (hardcover)|ISBN
9781250103529 (e-book)
Subjects: LCSH: Executive ability.|Leadership.|Personnel
management.|Corporate culture.
Classification: LCC HD38.2 .S4125 2017|DDC 658.4/09—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016044291
e-ISBN 9781250103529
Our e-books may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or
business use. Please contact your local bookseller or the Macmillan
Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension
5442, or by e-mail at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.

First Edition: March 2017

CONTENTS

Title Page
Copyright Notice
Dedication
Introduction
How to Use this Book
Part I: A New Management Philosophy
1. Build Radically Candid Relationships: Bringing your whole self to work
2. Get, Give, and Encourage Guidance: Creating a culture of open communication
3. Understand What Motivates Each Person on Your Team: Helping people take a step in the
direction of their dreams
4. Drive Results Collaboratively: Telling people what to do doesn’t work
Part II: Tools & Techniques
5. Relationships: An approach to establishing trust with your direct reports
6. Guidance: Ideas for getting/giving/encouraging praise & criticism
7. Team: Techniques for avoiding boredom and burnout
8. Results: Things you can do to get stuff done together—faster
Notes
Getting Started
Acknowledgments
Index
About the Author
Copyright

